So, a while ago, when I was doing


research for some other video, I


randomly came across an article on a


British business news website called


Business Crack, the first for Cumbria


business news. And it's about this


American-inspired


[music] souvenir store that had become a


big sensation in the city of Keswick,


selling stickers and patches [music] and


this sort of thing. And I thought it was


very interesting how the British owner


described the aesthetic of her store. At


one point, it that really cool American


adventure Wes Anderson aesthetic. And


then she later describes it as that


American outdoors [music] aesthetic. And


I thought that that was pretty


interesting because this is certainly an


aesthetic that I myself have seen many


times in shops [music]


and souvenir stores here in the Pacific


Northwest. It's that sort of rustic


cabin look, where the walls [music] and


shelves are made of dark, unpainted wood


and accessorized with various


stereotypical camping props, like


kerosene oil lamps and thick, folded


flannel blankets and wall-mounted


snowshoes and canoe paddles. It's all


supposed to evoke that primitive, yet


cozy vibe you get to experience when you


visit parts of this continent that are


still dominated by the mostly untamed


wilderness, particularly the woods and


mountains and the various human


accommodations that have been built in


and around such places,


>> [music]


>> mostly cabins, but also general stores,


ski chalets, and offices of the National


[music] Park Service. As the woman in


Keswick observes, the director Wes


Anderson tends to be fond [music] of


using this aesthetic in some of his


films, particularly Moonrise Kingdom,


which takes place at a summer camp. But


anyway, this British lady made me


appreciate the degree that this is a


very distinctly American aesthetic, just


because it's [music] a look that's


grounded in a certain sentimentality for


the particular geography of the United


States and Canada and the various


cultural norms and traditions that we've


created in response to living in this


unique part of the world. On this


continent, spending time in rugged


remote buildings in the forest has been


a traditional part of life for centuries


and as the centuries have progressed,


we've managed to refine that experience


into something increasingly stylized


that can be mass replicated in places


like Airbnbs, quirky independent grocery


stores,


>> [music]


>> doorsy clothing chains, and British


souvenir shops, apparently. Just throw


up some felt pennants and a fireplace


made of uneven rocks and you're there.


Aesthetics, which is to say the specific


styles in which things are designed to


look, be they electronics, posters,


rooms, fashion, whatever, is one of


these very hot topics right now that the


kids can't get enough of. The problem,


however, is that the online study of


aesthetics has also become substantially


corrupted by what I call


Pokemonification,


which is what I call it when internet


people take some perfectly normal human


concept and turn it into a game of


collecting as many things as you can and


giving them all weird names. So, the


kids are like, "Oh, my favorite


aesthetic is Frutiger Aero. Mine is Surf


Crush. Mine is Pianocore. Mine is


Vaporwave.


Mine is Evan's Loss Board." Only some of


those are real, but then again, what


even is real? just things that internet


people say and anyone can say anything.


Anyway, the point is today, I want to do


the opposite of Pokemonification and


talk about eight mainstream American


aesthetics that I think are very common


and familiar and can be described using


intuitive descriptive names that I think


ordinary people will immediately


recognize. These are American aesthetics


in the vein of the cabin aesthetic,


which is to say broad looks that we


associate with specific styles of decor


and design that are commonly found on


this continent. Looks that are comprised


from specific objects and patterns and


materials and props that can be employed


to bring a specific vibe to shops and


restaurants and bedrooms and brands. And


I think that these eight aesthetics are


worth reflecting on just because they do


embody a bit of our collective American


cultural inheritance, even if we tend to


take them for granted. In fact, I would


say it is precisely because we take them


for granted that they are actually some


of the best manifestations of American


culture. But, before we get to any of


that, let us just hear a quick word from


your favorite sponsor and mine, Incogni.


So, Incogni is an online service that


gets companies to delete whatever


personal information they've collected


about you. Thought I should just lead


with the pitch [music] directly this


time. We've all surrendered an enormous


amount of personal data over the years


to all sorts of websites when [music] we


sign up for things or shop or whatever,


but rarely do we think about where all


of this personal data winds up. And the


answer is a lot of it winds up in the


hands of what we euphemistically call


third parties, which are companies that


specialize in the collection of personal


data in order to sell it to people who


want to send you spam texts [music] and


phone calls and emails and in some cases


even junk mail. What I've always found


interesting, however, is that under the


laws of most Western countries, these


third parties are legally obligated to


delete whatever data they have on you


whenever you ask. And Incogni knows


exactly who to ask, and after you sign


up with them, they start asking them,


and you get to see a nice little


deletion report of all the progress that


they're making. And even if you think


that you know someone who has your data


that Incogni doesn't, you can now


actually get them to file a custom data


deletion request for any website you


choose. So, yes, Incogni is great, and


viewers of this channel can get access


to it at a much cheaper rate than some


rando off the street. Just visit


incogni.com/jjmcc,


or use promo code jjmcc for an amazing


60% off an annual plan. So, exercise


your rights and take back what is


properly yours, and give Incogni a try


today. All right, so let me start off by


yapping a bit about the circus


aesthetic. As I described in a previous


award-winning video, the modern American


circus first arose in the middle of the


19th century, and emerged as a popular


form of middle-class entertainment at a


time when middle-class entertainment was


first starting to become a thing. In the


first decades of the 20th century,


tropes associated with the traditional


19th century circus became heavily


nostalgified


in some of the earliest waves of


organized American nostalgia, precisely


because the circus was one of the first


forms of mass entertainment in America,


it became easy to sentimentalize as a


timeless symbol of family fun and


wonder. When I was a kid, and I'm really


dating myself with this reference, there


used to be a VHS rental store near my


house that was called Jumbo Video, and


it was done up in a sort of circus


aesthetic. The mascot was an elephant


with balloons in his trunk, and I think


he was standing on one of those little


circular platform things, and the video


boxes had red and white stripes on them


like a circus tent, and right at the


entrance they had one [music] of those


old-fashioned popcorn machines where you


could get free bags of popcorn in those


little red and white bags, which was


always a real thrill for little JJ. I


likewise grew up at a time when it was


still common for kids' birthday parties


to have a circus aesthetic, with circus


critters on the paper plates and party


hats, or a cake done up in the shape of


a clown's face or maybe even a real life


clown at the party itself. Do people


still invite clowns to parties? I would


assume not just because in the late 20th


century we decided that the American


circus aesthetic worked better as a


style of horror with scary circus tents


and clowns and creepy circus signs now a


common sight at those adult haunted


house places they set up around


Halloween. If you've ever played that


old arcade shooter game CarnEvil,


they have a lot of fun with this vibe as


well. But of course you still do see


circus aesthetics used in more innocent


friendly contexts too. Candy and snacks


sometimes use [music] circus branding to


play up the idea that they're fun for


kids as do [music] indoor play places


and toys marketed to very young children


like stuff to help you learn your ABCs


and things like that. Carnivals and


theme parks and county fairs will


generally still have a fair bit of


circus aesthetics to them just given


that these are the sort of modern day


inheritors of that circus-like [music]


family entertainment tradition. Along


with red and white stripes, I feel like


a lot of the distinct types of


typography you see on carnival signage


tends to read as very circus [music]


coded. Now at the same time circus


aesthetics can sometimes start to get a


bit hazy and blend into a more


generalized Gay Nineties Victorian


[music] sort of vibe which is probably a


good transition into our next aesthetic.


The Wild West era in American history is


sometimes described as one of the most


overrated just in terms of how obsessed


people are with it relative to how brief


it was. Though there's no precise


definition, I feel like the age of the


Wild West is generally understood to


describe some period in the late 19th


century after the Civil War but before


the dawn of the 20th century. So like


the 1870s through the 1890s or so. And


we call it the Wild West because it


alludes to a period of American history


where the western part of this


continent, particularly the southwest,


was still perceived as wild by the white


man because he had not fully colonized


it yet. In practice, this means that a


lot of Wild West aesthetics are


associated with the various forms of


19th century infrastructure set up by


white colonists during the course of


establishing American communities on


land that they had never previously


inhabited. So for starters, a lot of


Wild West aesthetics center around


things that symbolize the very act of


migrating west, particularly covered


wagons driven by horse [music] or oxen,


and then the steel horse of the


transcontinental railroad. And then of


course, once the west was reached, a lot


of men would proceed to work as cattle


ranchers. And from [music] this we get


all of the tropes of the American


cowboy, which I'm sure you're all


familiar with. Western frontier towns


were often thrown together in a pretty


improvised way. And from this came a


unique aesthetic that was born from


combining ornate Victorian fussiness


with rather poor and often quite


dysfunctional communities. I feel like


the most iconic Wild West locale is the


saloon, probably in large part because


these were places where so many


different Wild West stereotypes all


congregated together. You'd have cowboys


playing cards, which was a big thing,


and then bartenders [music] with these


big mustaches serving all of these very


old-fashioned 19th century cocktails and


fancy bottles, and saucy female


entertainers [snorts]


singing and dancing in elaborate


Victorian dresses, or maybe they weren't


entertainers at all, but prostitutes.


And there'd be all sorts of other subtle


things as well, like those swinging


saloon style doors and some guy playing


that really weird plinky plonky style of


piano music, and maybe some wanted


posters on the wall so everyone knew who


to shoot with their


old-timey revolvers. These days, we are


supposed to be sensitive to the fact


that a lot of the colonization of the


American West was a form of genocide


against the Native Americans, but on


some level this unglamorous fact has


always been incorporated into Wild West


aesthetics, and not always in a purely


racist way, either. A lot of the


reverence that Native American culture


gets in American culture more generally


is often tied to memories of the First


Nations people of this continent as


warriors [music] defending their land, a


proud people who refused to be


assimilated into Western ways, even when


faced with the threat of destruction. An


interesting example of this is how even


within indigenous North American


culture, a lot of Aboriginal people


outside the American West and Southwest


have nevertheless come to incorporate


the traditions and symbols of the first


people of this region into their own


cultures. Feather bonnet head dresses


and teepees and tomahawks, for example,


originate from Western Plains Indian


traditions, but are now likely to be


embraced as generic symbols of Native


American identity by Native Americans


themselves, regardless of where on this


continent they live. Today, I feel like


a lot of Wild West aesthetics are


specifically associated with Texas and


the country and Western music scene of


the American South, but you do see it to


some degree embraced everywhere west of


the 100th meridian as well. It's a quite


popular aesthetic in Alberta, for


instance, a place that has long branded


itself as Canada's Wild West. But the


whole saloon and cowboy aesthetic is


something that you'll see kept alive as


far west as California and in parts of


the Pacific Northwest, as well, even if


it's only in the form of one of those


places where they take a sepia toned


photograph of your family dressed like


you're going to the rodeo. Okay, now a


kindler, gentler rugged aesthetic is the


farmhouse. This one feels less


regionally particular because there were


farms all across this continent and with


farms comes the farmhouse, [music]


which is to say the house on the farm


where the farmer and his family lived.


Now, for much of American history, being


a farmer was a pretty tough job and


often the only job available to poor


migrants to this continent. At some


point in the early 20th century,


however, this dynamic began to change


with people moving away from


agricultural work with the farmers that


remained becoming more comfortably


middle class. I feel like this is a lot


of what the modern farmhouse aesthetic


is supposed to evoke, the idea of the


home of a comfortably middle class farm


family who enjoy a way of life that is


simple and rural without being primitive


or poor. So, it's associated with things


like out of date appliances and fairly


tacky decorations, but also bright and


[music] cozy patterns and attractive


antique furniture. I feel like the


farmhouse aesthetic is quite closely


associated with the kitchen


>> [music]


>> in particular, just because there's


clearly a close connection between farms


and food and I would say especially


breakfast coded foods like eggs and


butter and milk, which is why a lot of


traditional farmhouse aesthetic


decorations involve things like pitchers


[music]


or butter dishes done up to look like


cows or chickens or old timey tin jugs


for storing milk [music] and cute little


baskets for the eggs. A lot of cozy


American chain restaurants, especially


ones that specialize in breakfast, have


been known to embrace this aesthetic, as


have a lot of Airbnbs. Again, it comes


down to evoking this idea of the


middle-class farmer as a symbol of a


certain authentic, pure form of American


living, where the food is always fresh,


the quilts are always soft, and you


can't use like 90% of the dishes because


they're just for show.


So, if Wild West aesthetics were


quintessentially Western, I feel like


nautical aesthetics are more


stereotypically Eastern, particularly


the greater New England area. This is


the aesthetic that seeks to capture the


vibe of coastal, oceanfront living


associated with sailing, fishing, and


going to the beach. Touristy places in


Maine and Massachusetts and Nova Scotia,


Newfoundland lean into this aesthetic


[music] a lot. But, you do see it on the


West Coast, as well. When I was a kid,


we'd always go on summer vacation to the


coast of Oregon, and when we were down


there, all of the seafood restaurants


and souvenir shops would always be


decked out in all of this standard


nautical stuff like fishing nets and


buoys and dried starfish [music]


and big ship steering wheels on the


wall. While the hotels we would stay at


would always have things like a ship in


the bottle on the coffee table or one of


those big white and orange lifesaver


things over the fireplace in the living


room. My Zoomer viewers will no doubt be


quick to notice that this is an


aesthetic that is a big part of


SpongeBob, which is a show that makes


quite good use of a lot of American


aesthetic tropes, I find. Let me know in


the comments if you want to see me do


some SpongeBob content someday. Now,


there's a classier version of the


nautical aesthetic that is more


associated with like upper class New


England sailing culture than like


working class fisherman culture. The


brand identity of some of the the


higher-end quiet luxury clothing


companies like Ralph Lauren is very much


based around this version and a lot of


cruise ship companies try to embrace it


as well along with a limited color


palette of navy blue and white. I feel


like we associate higher-end nautical


aesthetics with like rope. Like big


thick white ropes that are supposed to


evoke the sailing masts or whatever.


I don't know much about sailing, but I


have often seen these little framed


displays of all the different knots that


a sophisticated sailor is supposed to


know how to tie. Oh, and the flags. Big


nautical vibes can be [music] found in


flags, especially those primary colored


semaphore flags. [music] You could


easily make the case that the nautical


aesthetic is the oldest continuously


used aesthetic in America just because


seafaring is how the Europeans first


made their way to this continent way


back when meaning familiarity with and


sentimentality for stuff relating to


ships and ports and docks and sailors


and all of that is an inseparable part


of the historic heritage of this


continental civilization or at least the


part of it that came over in boats.


So, I already made a whole other video


about one of the more modern American


aesthetics which is mid-century. So, I


will try to not repeat myself too much


here. Mid-century refers to the design


sensibilities of the 1950s and early 60s


and is now most often used in products


and media that wants to project an


aggressively retro but still hip sort of


vibe. But overall, I feel it's an


aesthetic that's used overwhelmingly in


one very particular purpose these days,


and that's diners. In fact, the '50s


aesthetic is interesting precisely


because it is so tightly fused with the


emergence of the '50s diner as a


mainstream American [music] cultural


institution. I don't know about where


you live, but in my city, we have at


least four different 1950s diners that


I'm aware of, all of which have the same


black and white floors, the same chrome


and vinyl stools, the same menu of


burgers and milkshakes and grilled


cheese sandwiches, and the same broken


jukebox. When you ask people what


defines American culture, the


semi-sarcastic answer you always get is


burgers. But at the end of the day, I do


think a lot of people over here do like


burgers a lot and have pretty high


standards for them. And I feel like the


mid-century diner, with all of its


associated folderol, is actually a kind


of important way of celebrating the


cultural heritage of the burger, and in


that sense is a space little different


than the sushi restaurant where they


make you sit on the floor, or the


Mexican restaurant where they serve the


guacamole in those little stone bowls.


So, in the mid to late 19th century, the


American economy became increasingly


industrialized as a result of my most


favorite thing, the Industrial


Revolution. This heralded a dramatic


growth in factories, and with it a new


industrial aesthetic associated with how


factories looked. Although, I would say


that industrial aesthetics only [music]


really started to become a source of


widespread sentimentality once people


started to work in factories less and


less. When you're already spending all


day screwing together bolts on the old


assembly line, very much doubt the


industrial aesthetic was something you


wanted to see [music]


anywhere else. Factories are, of course,


designed to be very practical places in


which stuff is designed for function,


[music]


not beauty. But, this inadvertently


wound up creating an aesthetic


sensibility that could be quite


attractive precisely because of its


unpretentiousness. If I had to pick just


one word to sum up the whole industrial


look, it would probably be exposed.


Instead of seeking to cover up or


conceal the bones and organs of modern


living, industrial aesthetics put it all


out on open display. Unpainted brick


walls, light bulbs without shades,


cement floors without carpet or


linoleum, and water pipes and


ventilation ducts rather than ceilings.


As American culture becomes


progressively more and more casual, I


feel like industrial aesthetics are now


edging towards becoming the dominant


aesthetic of our time. You go to the


mall these days, and I feel like all the


cool stores will have exposed pipe


ceilings and very plain metal shelves


rather than anything more fancy. A lot


of modern fast food places are very


similar with nondescript metal chairs


and stools, unfinished floors, and


simple tables made from thick slabs of


wood. A lot of these sorts of places,


similarly, like to display their menus


on boards that look like chalkboards or


metal sheets. Or, if it's more of a


sit-down place, maybe a sheet of paper


on a little clipboard. And this is the


case on the opposite end of the


spectrum, too. Since the '90s or so,


there's been a real trend towards


high-end luxury apartments, particularly


lofts, that are done up in this


aggressively industrial style, resulting


in this kind of interesting mix where


you'll have a clearly expensive home


that is putting great effort into


looking modest and unfinished. I feel


like a lot of this is also very


masculine coded. The idea that interior


decorating that is too visible or


elaborate is feminine. Well, a properly


manly space should look a little


half-assed or maybe even slightly


dangerous. And I feel like this brings


me to the last of my big eight


aesthetics, which I also think is quite


masculine coded, and that is the rec


room aesthetic. So, this is kind of a


broad one, but it basically describes a


kind of maximalist aesthetic where you


embrace the idea of collecting and


displaying a ton of random stuff


reflecting your tastes and interests and


solicit a lot of nostalgia for things


like pop culture, brands, and products.


I feel like this was an American


aesthetic that first started to take off


in the 1970s because that was a decade


in which enough time had passed for


people to start really getting


aggressively sentimental about the huge


explosion of American cultural products


that had emerged over the course of the


20th century. This included all sorts of


bric-a-brac like movie posters and


iconic photos of celebrities and


corporate logos and advertisements and


things associated with jazz and rock and


roll and professional sports teams and


athletes. People often like to use the


term Americana to describe this sort of


vibe as well in the sense of the


sentimental embrace of things that


invoke a distinct sense of American


cultural identity. The rec room in a


middle-class family home was an


important breeding ground for this sort


of aesthetic because it embodied the


novel idea of a room that existed purely


for recreational activities like


listening to music or watching TV.


Today, people like to call these sorts


of spaces man caves. Once video game


culture became a thing, we got the


similar but distinct idea of a gaming


room. But, I feel like British pub


culture played an important role in the


rise of this aesthetic as well. The idea


of creating cozy spaces that [music]


were also full of carefully curated


nostalgia triggers. And indeed, I feel


like one of the places where you're most


likely to see this rec room type


aesthetic is in very casual bars,


especially sports bars, where they can


really go nuts [music] with the athletic


memorabilia angle. But a lot of family


restaurant chains really go for it as


well. As a kid, I remember my most


favorite restaurant was always Red Robin


just because their walls were absolutely


covered with the wildest assortment of


all the most random [music] Americana


nonsense you could possibly imagine.


Andy Warhol prints, weird photographs of


gumball machines, old kitchy horror


movie posters, gas station signs, you


name it. As you can tell from my own set


here, I'm pretty partial to maximalist


aesthetics in general. So, I like to


think that my vibe is maybe a little bit


more global than Americana. But you


know, something that I've thought about


was that if I ever had a restaurant, I


think it would be cool to try to do the


traditional TGI Friday Americana thing,


but with exclusively modern knickknacks.


The rec room aesthetic really tries to


bombard you with nostalgia, but there is


a tendency to restrict the nostalgia


triggers to only stuff from like before


the 1980s. So, I wonder what it would be


like if you had one of these family


restaurants, but you only decorated it


with things from like the last 40 years.


So, like if instead of one of those


Coca-Cola buttons, you had like the


Netscape logo. Maybe this is already a


thing and I just don't know the name


that the zoomers have given it because I


don't read the aesthetics wiki enough.


But anyway, let me know what you think


about my big eight. Do any of these play


a role in your life or any place [music]


that's particularly special to you? Do


you think I've missed any additional


important or obvious ones? Can you think


of any good examples of places or brands


that fall into one of the eight? Let me


know in the comments and I will see you


next week.


>> [music]