Hello friends, my name is JJ and today
we are going to talk about school
supplies. Do you remember how much fun
it was to go shopping for this stuff
back in the day? Going to Walmart or
wherever and having your mother let you
pick out all of these fresh shiny new
pencils and pens and notebooks and all
the rest. A lot of us stay fascinated
with this kind of stuff for the rest of
our adult lives and continue to get a
big thrill out of buying it. Though at
some point we tend to describe it using
the more grown-up name stationary. So,
here is a drawing I made of what I
consider to be the big seven stationary
objects in American culture based on the
sorts of things that I think you will
see most frequently depicted in school
or office themed posters and cards and
toys and cakes and all that. And I
thought today we would look at where
these seven specific forms of school
supplies came from, why they've come to
look like this, and whether they tell us
anything interesting about the evolution
of American culture. So, in the course
of making many videos on American
cultural objects, I am often struck by
how many things originated in America
itself. This is much less the case with
school supplies, however, which tend to
be ideas that were imported from Europe,
fully formed, with Americans only
occasionally making minor adjustments
later on. Even today, a lot of the
world's biggest stationary companies
remain European. All right, so with that
euroentric throat clearing out of the
way, let us begin by talking about the
object that is perhaps the purest
essence of stationery,
paper. For most of their history,
Europeans did their writing on all sorts
of things. Stone, wood, wax, and
eventually parchment, which is basically
dried animal skin. You could skin a
sheep and get maybe seven sheets of
parchment out of him, which made
primitive books extraordinarily
expensive and timeconuming to make. But
luckily, no one could read back then, so
it was a bit of a moot point. According
to this book, Paper Paging Through
History by Mark Kansky, the technology
of making paper, which was a kind of
synthetic parchment made out of dried
cotton mush, was first picked up by the
Italians from their Arab neighbors
sometime in the 1200s. The city of
Fabriano likes to take credit for
inventing European style paper and the
Fabriano Corporation, founded in 1264,
remains a popular brand of art paper to
this day. By the mid-400s, paperm was a
wellestablished industry in all of the
big cities of Europe, which was good
because this was around the same time
that Gutenberg invented the printing
press, which really drove up the demand
for paper. It's common to frame the
emergence of the printing press as
representing the moment in which Europe
started to become a much more literary
society and eventually the world's
intellectual capital. But the author
says that the mainstreaming of
papermaking technology mattered just as
much. Many centuries later in the mid
19th century some German inventors had
been experimenting with a new technology
to make a cheaper sort of paper out of
pulp made from wood. In the 1860s, a
German immigrant living in Massachusetts
named Albertch P. Paganstecker imported
some of this tech to America and a new
industry was born. Since America was so
full of trees, Albertch was able to
establish a bunch of highly profitable
wood paper factories all across this
continent, founding the company now
known as International Paper and
displacing Europe as the world's paper
producing superpower. His
entrepreneurship would prove a
particular boon to those of us here in
the Pacific Northwest, which developed a
hugely profitable paper industry during
the late 19th century, thanks to all of
the fur trees that grow to such massive
heights in our rainy climate. Lines on
paper were originally drawn by hand, and
this is something they used to teach
kids to do at school. I actually
remember being taught to do this in
school myself. I don't know if they're
still doing that or if I'm just old. But
paper with blue lines already printed on
it has been available for sale as a
commercial product for nearly 200 years.
In the 1840s, a guy from Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania named William O. Hickok
invented the modern version of what's
known as a paper ruling machine, which
could draw uniformly spaced lines on
commercially produced paper. The
Smithsonian says that his contraption
established the principles of all ruling
machines to come, which is certainly
more than any of us have done with our
lives.
Wood pencils are basically just the
modern version of an ancient tool that's
been around forever, known as a chalk
holder. You'd get a small hunk of some
kind of rock that was soft enough to
draw with, and then you'd put the piece
into the end of some long thin stick of
wood or metal in order to have better
control and keep your hands clean. All
of your favorite Renaissance artists
drew with these things. Lead is a
mineral that Europe has a lot of, and
because it was soft without being
crumbly, it emerged as a popular type of
rock to use in these proto pencils. So
much so, in fact, that you may have
noticed that we still call what's in
pencils lead to this day. But lead is
ultimately not soft enough to make
particularly dark lines. Meaning that
one of the most important breakthroughs
in pencil history came in the mid6th
century when a giant deposit of the
mineral graphite was discovered in
northern England. And the English soon
realized that graphite made for much
better pencil lead than lead itself.
According to this book, The Pencil: A
History of Design and Circumstance by
Henry Petroski, the present form of the
pencil dates back to the end of the 17th
century, which is when we have the
earliest records of people selling
sticks of wood with sticks of graphite
encased inside. Though we don't know for
sure where or when the idea was
invented. The English town of Kessichk,
which is close to the big graphite mine,
claims to be the birthplace of the
modern pencil. But it's possible that
the Germans actually came up with it
first. In any case, because England had
access to a giant graphite mine, they
became the leaders of commercial pencil
making in 18th century Europe and indeed
actively tried to weaken the pencil
industries of other countries by not
selling graphite to them. In 1794, a
French pencil maker named Nicholas Jacqu
Conti was annoyed by his lack of access
to British graphite. So he started
combining the small amounts of graphite
he had with clay. And this actually
wound up creating an even better,
softer, darker form of pencil lead,
which is still the kind we use today. As
you might expect, the French are very
proud of this story of outsmarting the
British at their own game. And the
modern-day Aante pencil company now
straight up claims to have invented the
pencil on the basis of this. So take
that Kessk. Another big player in the
European pencil scene was the Fabber
family in Germany. Once the patriarch
died in 1839, the three Fabber brothers
all split off and formed rival pencil
companies to compete with each other. In
the mid- 19th century, the firm run by
the eldest Fabber brother came up with a
system of sorting pencils into 16
different grades of hardness based on
the specific graphite to clay ratio of
the lead. So, the softest grades would
be B and then HB, which is moderate to H
and F grades, which are super hard.
Nobody really knows what the letters
mean, in case you were wondering. One of
the other Fabber brothers immigrated to
New York where he sold his pencils with
a simpler rating system based on numbers
alone and only four of them. And this
family feud is why Europeans and
Americans use different pencil rating
systems to this day. Now, once pencils
started being mass-produced, it became
common to paint them various colors to
make them look pretty and feel nicer to
hold. But it's not really clear why
yellow emerged as the standard color.
There is a Czech company called Kuor
that likes to take credit for inventing
the yellow pencil because they
introduced a very popular brand of
luxury pencil in 1890 that was colored
yellow. And because it was so popular,
other pencil companies soon started
selling yellow pencils of their own to
capitalize on this association between
yellow and quality, which is the sort of
thing you see a lot in the business
world. A company does something unique
yet untrademarkable
and soon after the market gets flooded
with generic copycat versions. But why
Kuor itself went with yellow isn't
really wellnown. Here is the main
theory. Like many European pencil
companies of the time, Kuor was getting
its graphite from mines in Siberia. With
this fact being marketed as something
that made their pencils better. And
since yellow was supposedly a color
associated with the exotic Far East,
painting Kuanor pencils, that color made
them seem like objects from the
glamorous Orient, which I guess you
could also see from the fact that the
company called itself Kuor after the
famous Indian diamond. Anyway, talking
of names, the word pencil itself has a
somewhat interesting backstory. pencil
originates from the Latin word piculus,
meaning uh little penis. But that's less
weird than it sounds because in Latin,
penis also means tail. And for much of
history, pencil was also used to refer
to small thin paint brushes and only
later started to evolve into a more
generic term for any sort of writing or
drawing tool. Small paintbrush still
appears as the primary definition for
pencil in a lot of dictionaries even
today. So, in that sense, the little
tail meaning of little penis makes
perfect sense.
Hello friends. Sorry to interrupt, but I
just wanted to talk about something
quickly. I really like making videos for
you guys, particularly cultural history
ones like this one. I always get a lot
of positive feedback, but I also know
that these kinds of videos are not
necessarily the types that have a broad
enough appeal to get gigantic views. And
unfortunately, gigantic views tend to be
the name of the game here on YouTube.
So, if you have enjoyed my videos in the
past and are enjoying this one, I would
just ask you to consider making a
donation to my Patreon page. Channels
that have a more niche appeal, like
mine, often make ample use of Patreon,
and people are often telling me that I
should lean into it more. So, consider
this me leaning into it. With greater
Patreon funding, I could conceivably
rely less on sponsorships and have a
more stable base to finance the
production of the videos themselves.
Some of my videos are a lot more
expensive to make than they might seem
just because I put so much effort into
trying to always buy, you know, the best
pictures and books and props and all the
rest of it rather than cheaping out. And
I think that is one of the things that
makes my videos feel different than some
of the other educational content on
YouTube. In the next few months, I have
a lot of video ideas that I'm really
excited to get cracking on, including
more videos in my lesser 30 series, some
more iceberg videos, some more videos on
the presidents, and a couple of videos
on British culture that I'm actually
going to be going to England next week
in part to do some research for. So, if
you have enjoyed my videos over the last
decade, and are interested in making a
financial contribution, even if just
temporarily, please consider becoming a
Patreon donor. It would mean a lot to
me. and do a lot of good things for the
future of this channel. Thank you so
much for your time. And now back to
school supplies.
So these things are what we in the
English-speaking world call crayons,
which comes from the French word for
pencil. And the linguistics of school
supplies are so confusing, and we're not
even at the worst of it yet. Colored
pencils were introduced in the 1840s by
a German guy called Johan Stadler of the
Studler Corporation. He had invented yet
another new type of pencil lead. This
time made out of chalk and wax. When
mixed with pigment, the lead of these
types of pencils could lay down
beautiful chalky waxy lines of color.
Perfect for filling in pictures of bluey
or whatever. Fun fact, here in Canada,
we call colored pencils pencil crayons,
which is said to have originated from a
confused reading of French English
bilingual packaging introduced to this
country in the 1970s. Anyway, when Johan
Stadler came up with the idea of colored
pencils, he wasn't being that
revolutionary. Artists had been using
colored chalk for centuries, and there
existed primitive crayons that were made
of ink and wax that were used by
industrial workers to write notes and
numbers on boxes and barrels and things.
In late 19th century New York, there was
a popular company called Benny and Smith
that sold stationary supplies to schools
and businesses, including chalk for
classrooms and black marking crayons for
factories. And then one day, Benny and
Smith were like, "Hey, what if we
targeted our first market with our
second product?" And so in 1903, they
started selling boxes of colored school
crayons under a brand name that Mr.
Benny's wife had dreamed up, Crayola.
The product was a huge hit and Crayola
would proceed to become one of the great
American brands of the 20th century,
selling larger and larger boxes of
crayons to increasingly spoiled American
school children and eventually all sorts
of other gimmicky stationery for the
kiddos as well.
The English word pen feels like it
should have something to do with the
word pencil, but it doesn't. They
evolved from two completely different
Latin words meaning different things.
Today, we often think of pens as like an
upgraded pencil, but it's easy to argue
that pens actually came first. Long
before anybody started putting chalk
into pieces of wood, people were dipping
sharpened sticks into dishes of
primitive ink and scratching words onto
wood or parchment. These were primitive
dip pens, the most common form of pen
for most of human history. You guys
probably already know that for many
centuries, Europeans thought that
feathers made for the best dip pens. All
your favorite ancient documents from the
Magna Carta to the Treaty of West Failia
were written and signed with feathers.
Though unlike in cartoons, they'd often
shave off the feathery parts first and
just use the shaft. Dip pens made of
wood or ceramic with a nib made of brass
or copper or gold started to go
mainstream in the 1800s, but these were
a luxury item for the elite. Common
people just use pencils or chalk or
nothing because they were probably
illiterate. Mankind's earliest forms of
ink were made of basically anything that
could be turned into a dark liquid.
Berries, bug guts, blood. But as time
went on, more sophisticated chemical
inks were developed. When protochemists
discovered that if you mixed various
plant products and minerals together,
you could create a watery opaque
substance with a brilliant black or blue
color. For many centuries, Europeans
favored a particular sort of black ink
made from mixing iron sulfate with a
type of acid contained in these tumorous
growths found on the branches of oak
trees. According to this Wired article,
the most popular forms of modern ink, by
contrast, are made through some mixture
of synthetic dye, phenolanol,
alolacalanomide,
and oolleic acid. So now you know. In
1884, yet another New Yorker called L E
Waterman invented a contraption that he
called the fountain pen. It was a type
of hollow metal pen that you would fill
up with ink that would then be released
in appropriate quantity as you wrote. It
was a remarkable feat of fluid
engineering that old man Waterman had
devised after much trial and error.
Fountain pens would prove to be a
must-have consumer good for much of the
next half century. But all that changed
in the 1940s. An Argentine named
Lattislau Bro had invented a
revolutionary new ballpoint pen that
never had to be refilled, used a ball
bearing instead of a nib, and was vastly
thinner, lighter, and cleaner than any
type of pen that had ever come before.
And because you could make the body of
the pen out of cheap and abundant
plastic, the hot new material of the
day, these pens could be manufactured at
a massive scale and sold at low, low
prices. An American company called
Reynolds started mass-producing and
selling pens based on Bro's design in
1945, but was soon overshadowed by the
Bick Corporation of France, which in
1951 released an even better ballpoint
pen, which proceeded to conquer the
world. In 2021, the Bick Crystal
celebrated its 70th anniversary, by
which point the company claimed to have
sold over 100 billion of these pens,
literally enough for every human being
who had ever lived. I never realized
this until now, but their mascot, the
little Bickman, he's supposed to have a
ballpoint for a head.
Okay, so this is one of the most
brainbending facts I've ever learned in
the history of this channel. So, erasers
started to become mainstream around the
same time that mass-produced wooden
pencils did, which is to say the mid
18th century. Credit for inventing them
is often given to the famous English
chemist Joseph Priestley, who although
perhaps better known for discovering
oxygen, was also part of a new class of
educated Europeans making ample use of
wooden pencils to do their equations and
stuff. Dr. Priestley was very interested
in this new goop they had discovered
inside of trees in the New World, the
substance that we call rubber. And
surprisingly enough, he found that it
was very good for gently erasing
graphite marks from paper, which had
something to do with the way that the
chemical makeup of rubber made it absorb
graphite dust like a magnet. Now, in
England to this day, they call erasers
rubbers. And this always seemed normal
enough to me. You know, you call
something after what it's made of. But
my mind was blown when I learned that
the substance rubber wasn't actually
called rubber until after erasers were
invented. This is because the word
rubber in English previously described a
brush or a cloth that you would use to
clean something, a thing that you would
literally rub on something else. So, a
pencil eraser was seen as a kind of
rubber. You following me? Since erasers
were the first mainstream use of the
substance rubber in England, it soon
became mainstream to call the substance
rubber as well or sometimes Indian
rubber. Although the American Indians
never actually used the substance for
this purpose. Maybe none of this seems
particularly wild to British people. But
speaking from this side of the pond, I
have to say that learning this fact has
really put the whole meaning of rubber
into a crazy new light. Like this means
that a rubber tree is literally an
eraser tree. And rubber tires are eraser
tires. And when we call a condom a
rubber, we're literally calling it an
eraser. Before erasers were invented,
English speakers just described the
substance rubber as being the gum of a
type of new world tree. And in most
other European languages, their word for
eraser is just their word for gum. And
this is usually the case for their word
for rubber as well. So calling an eraser
an eraser is a very distinctly American
thing. And according to the Oxford
English dictionary, we only started
using the term in the early 1800s.
Crazy. Anyway, we used natural rubber to
make erasers for a very long time until
the Japanese conquered all of the
Europeans rubber exporting colonies in
Asia during World War II. Eraser
exporting colonies. It sounds so bizarre
now. And it was at that point that the
West switched to making erasers out of
synthetic latex and vinyl to artificial
rubber alternatives dreamed up by
ingenious American inventors. Putting
erasers at the end of pencils is
something that pencil designers had
begun experimenting with in the 1850s
with the modern metal band system that
we know today. First patented in 1891 by
the son of the Fabber brother who had
immigrated to New York. This next
generation Fabber was also the one who
came up with the idea of making erasers
pink. Although I've heard conflicting
stories about why this is. The main
theory seems to be that there was some
ingredient though people dispute what
that Fabber Jr. was mixing with the
rubber to make it stronger. That also
made it turn pink. And then the
distinctive color was just embraced as a
marketing gimmick. Sometime in the early
20th century, the American FOB
Corporation released a line of
standalone erasers named the Pink Pearl,
capitalizing on the fame of actual pink
pearls, which were a common symbol of
wealth and luxury at the time. And much
like yellow pencils, pink erasers were
so popular that after a while, people
just assumed that this was the color
that erasers were supposed to be.
Though, I noticed this tends to be more
of an American thing. In Europe and
Asia, I feel like it's still pretty
common to think of like a generic eraser
as being white, often with one of those
little paper jackets.
A ruler is an essential tool for any
civilization that makes things since
everyone from jewelers to architects
have to be able to measure the exact
sizes of the various pieces of whatever
they're making. Here you can see a chunk
of an ancient Egyptian ruler owned by
the Met. For most of European history,
skilled workers would just make their
own rulers based on whatever increments
of size they found useful. There didn't
exist any unified system of measurement
other than some vaguely defined
traditional units that had been common
since Roman times like a foot's length
or a thumbs width. But this was fine
because as any mathematician will tell
you an ability to make accurate
calculations is more about just using a
consistent system of measurement rather
than any one particular system. This
concept is actually where the term ruler
comes from. Just as a rubber rubs
things, a ruler provides you with a rule
to use when measuring. As European
states became more unified and expanded
the flow of goods and information both
within and outside of their borders, it
became more necessary to come up with a
unified measurement system. In 1795, the
French came up with the metric system.
And then in 1824, the British introduced
what we now call the imperial system to
standardized systems of universally
usable units calibrated to the
dimensions of a collection of sacred
objects held by the national government.
And it was from this point on that you
started to see mass-roduced wooden
metric or imperial rulers sold as tools
to both highly skilled manual laborers
and prissy science nerd types. Indeed,
the Europeans considered the creation of
a standardized measurement system such a
grand cultural achievement that you will
often see portraits of 19th century big
shots posing with rulers as a way of
flexing how advanced their civilization
was.
The history of scissors isn't that
thrilling. The simple machine of
attaching two blades together with a
bolt and using handles to squeeze them
into making a controlled cut is an idea
that has been around for at least 2,000
years and appears to have independently
occurred to all sorts of different
ancient societies in Europe, Asia, and
the Middle East. You can see here a pair
of bronze scissors from ancient Rome
held by the Science Museum in London.
For most of human history, however, a
metal instrument this delicate and
precise would have mostly just been a
very expensive tool of very skilled
laborers like tailor, shoemakers,
barbers, and surgeons. The idea that any
random Yahoo could have his own pair of
scissors to cut coupons out of the Kmart
catalog only became possible once steel
started to be mass-produced in the
mid-9th century, which saw an explosion
of steel goods for ordinary household
use. The comparable explosion of plastic
products after World War II resulted in
the iconic plastic handled scissors that
we all know and love today, designed to
fit more comfortably into our pampered,
delicate postwar hands. So, there you
have it. The seven most beloved
stationary products from the great
American school supplies cannon. There's
probably a few I'm missing, so let me
know in the comments what else you think
should be in there. and let me know what
cannon of Americana you want to see me
talk about next. Thank you so much for
watching and I will see you next week.
[Music]