This video was brought to you by Nebula.


Hello friends. My name is JJ and don't


hate me for this, but I'm quite a fan of


Funko Pops. Funko Pops are of course


these highly collectible plastic


figurines of just about every character,


celebrity, and brand in existence.


Originally, the Funko Corporation


specialized in making these things,


bobblehead dolls. These are a very


classical style of American toy dating


back to at least the 1920s. In those


days, they were usually made of clay


because plastic was not a common thing


yet. In the 1960s, bobbleheads of


popular athletes became a big fad as the


American professional sports industry


really kicked into high gear and


baseball, basketball, football, and even


hockey players became some of the


biggest celebrities in the country. The


toy tradition got a second wind in the


early 2000s when bobbleheads entered a


more self-consciously kitschy, ironic


era with plastic dolls of somewhat less


heroic characters like politicians,


D-tier celebrities, and boomer era


corporate mascots. America's bobblehead


industry has always been centered in


Washington state and in 1998, the Funko


Corporation was founded in the city of


Everett to specifically capitalize on


the kitsch bobblehead trend. This


included making the controversial


decision to not make any athlete


bobbleheads, but instead double down


exclusively on pop culture stuff and it


seems to have worked. Funko's Wacky


Wobbler brand bobbleheads steadily grew


to dominate the market during the 2000s


and at some point they realized that no


one really cared about the bobbling,


they just wanted little big-headed


figurines. So, in 2010, they released a


new line of non-bobbling toys called


Funko Pops for pop culture and the rest


is history. The popularity of the Pops


has made Funko an extraordinarily


successful company pulling in a billion


dollars a year and having now produced


around 30,000 different figurines


representing over a thousand different


pop culture properties including movies,


bands, video games, comic books, anime,


food, and ironically enough, sports


stars. Funko claims to be the world's


largest proprietor of licenses, which


makes sense given officially licensed


products are basically the foundation of


their whole business model. Something


interesting is that Funko remains an


independent company. It is not owned by


either of the big two American toy


conglomerates who have spent much of the


last few decades gobbling up every other


toy brand across the country and now


appear to be on the brink of merging


with each other. Funko does make pops of


some of the iconic toy brands of the big


two, but they do this just by buying the


rights the same way they do for


everything else. Another interesting


thing is that Funko is very much not a


kids company. According to their most


recent investors report, the average


Funko customer is 36 years old, which is


why I, as a 39-year-old, am talking to


you about them today. When I first moved


into this apartment back in December, it


came with a little wine rack type thing


capable of holding 10 bottles and since


I don't drink, I thought it would be fun


to fill it up with Funko pops instead.


But not just any Funko pops, I was


thinking that I should try to get 10


that best reflect my favorite topic,


which is the American cultural canon. So


let's go through them one by one and


talk about what these lovable chunks of


plastic represent and why. I promise


you, it will be interesting.


All right, so first up we have Ronald


McDonald, the iconic mascot of the


McDonald's Corporation, one of the most


successful fast food companies on Earth.


Capitalizing on the burger and fries


craze that swept middle America after


World War II, McDonald's opened its


first chain restaurant in a Chicago


suburb in 1955 before proceeding to


spread across the country. The idea of a


chain restaurant managed by a single


corporation was a relatively new one at


the time, and McDonald's is credited


with helping pioneer many of the


conventions of chain companies we now


take for granted, such as national ad


campaigns on the newfangled medium of


television. Getting a clown to push


burgers to kids on TV was a scheme


originally dreamed up by McDonald's


DC-based restaurants, and in 1967,


Mickey D's HQ rolled out a national ad


campaign introducing a modified version


of that clown character to children


across the country. In a short period of


time, he became one of the most


recognizable corporate mascots in


America, and given the expanding number


of McDonald's' around the globe, a


leading symbol of American commerce and


capitalism as well. On that note, this


pop is not just a generic Ronald, but is


actually based on a particular Ronald


McDonald sculpture they often display


outside of McDonald's restaurants in the


nation of Thailand. You can see he has


his hands put together in a distinctive


Thai greeting gesture known as Wai,


which I think makes this an interesting


little artifact embodying several


distinct themes of Americanism. Next up,


we got Mickey Mouse, who may or may not


be just as famous as Ronald McDonald. I


have heard different things over the


years. Mickey is, of course, the mascot


of the Disney Corporation, the largest


entertainment company on Earth, but he


remains a popular cartoon character in


his own right as well, having appeared


in literally hundreds of animated


shorts, movies, video games, and more.


He was a purposely simple-looking


character created in 1928 by Mr. Walt


Disney himself, who also did the voice,


with his simplicity reflecting the fact


that in those days, making animated


cartoons was quite a complicated,


labor-intensive process, so there was a


bias towards making characters that were


easy to draw. One of the things that


made Mickey particularly noteworthy,


even back then, was that he appeared in


one of the first cartoons with sound.


An animated short called Steamboat


Willie that is still probably one of the


most famous cartoons ever made. This


particular Mickey is done up in a


rainbow because it's supposed to be a


special edition for pride. Pride, of


course, being an increasingly popular


annual celebration in America centered


around Americans who are part of sexual


and gender minority communities. The


association between rainbows and pride


is usually credited to a guy named


Gilbert Baker who created a special


rainbow flag to fly at the 1978 San


Francisco Pride parade which was and is


one of the biggest in the country. This


one here is a Darth Vader snowman. You


can see it has a bobbling head so Funko


hasn't completely forgotten their roots.


Darth Vader, as I'm sure we all know, is


the main villain in the very popular


Star Wars movie franchise now owned by


Disney. He was introduced in the very


first Star Wars film which is now called


Star Wars: A New Hope but when it first


came out in 1977 was simply called Star


Wars. It was written and directed by a


guy from California named George Lucas


who is often considered one of the most


important men in the history of American


film and probably one of the most


culturally influential Americans of the


last century or so as well. The Star


Wars films are usually described as


telling a relatively straightforward


tale of good versus evil with the dark,


ominous, hulking Vader who was played by


a British bodybuilder with his voice


dubbed in by James Earl Jones today


considered such an iconic symbol of evil


that his face has even been carved as a


gargoyle on the side of the National


Cathedral in Washington, D.C. The later


sequels and prequels do depict him as a


somewhat more nuanced character, a guy


who was destined for greatness as a


young man but ultimately falls under the


spell of what is known as the dark side


in the Star Wars jargon. This particular


Funko Pop is supposed to be a Christmas


edition with the idea of using snowmen


as a Christmas symbol usually credited


to the late Victorian era. This was a


time when the British were starting to


become a lot more sentimental about


Christmas and started commemorating a


lot of supposedly traditional Christmas


time activities on greeting cards and


things including building snowmen. A lot


of white middle class Americans were


still taking their cultural cues from


Britain at that time. So much of this


particular flavor of Christmas


sentimentality was imported stateside a


full scale. Of course, in a particularly


American context, the snowman as a


symbol of Christmas undoubtedly got its


biggest boost in 1950, which is when the


hit single Frosty the Snowman debuted.


Here we have Captain America done up as


a gingerbread man. So Captain America


seems like a pretty big deal right now.


He's one of the main characters in the


mega hit Marvel Avengers movie series,


which audiences can't seem to get enough


of. Also brought to you by Disney. For a


while he was being played by Chris


Evans, but in the next movie it's going


to be Anthony Mackie, right? I don't


know a lot about movies, so you're going


to have to help me out. The original


comic book version of the character was


dreamed up back in 1940 by two New


Yorkers, Jack Kirby and Joe Simon, and


was created explicitly to be an


uplifting symbol of American patriotism


during the bleak years of World War as


you can see from the cover of Captain


America number one. Captain America


number one incidentally also happens to


be one of the rarest and most valuable


comics in the world with a mint copy


selling at auction last year for 3.12


million dollars. The big gimmick of Cap


is that even in modern stories, he's


always supposed to be a guy from the


1940s. He's just been frozen for some


extended period of time and this allows


him to always embody a certain


old-fashioned spirit of heroism that


only gets more intense the further we


get from the World War II era.


Gingerbread, meanwhile, is a very old


style of cookie that was brought over


from England before sugar was as common


as it is today. People tended to season


treats with spices, with ginger-flavored


cookies being one popular example. This


guy is also supposed to be a Christmas


edition Funko, and it is precisely


because gingerbread is so old that it


also got bound up in the same British


Victorian Christmas nostalgia industrial


cultural complex that we talked about


earlier. This is an anthropomorphic can


of Coca-Cola, the most popular soda in


the world. It was developed by two guys


from Georgia in the late 19th century,


which was basically the golden era of


soda development. John Pemberton, who


came up with the original syrup recipe,


which was initially made from the


extract of coca leaves and cola nuts,


and intended to be a kind of medicine.


And Asa Candler, who bought the recipe


and had the bright idea to mix it with


carbonated water and make it into a soda


instead. Candler was also the founder of


the Coca-Cola Corporation, which today


has risen to not only be one of the


largest soda companies in the world, but


due to its ownership of several other


drink brands, one of the largest


beverage companies, too. Alongside


Mickey and McDonald's, Coke is probably


the single most recognizable symbol of


the global success of American business.


But has historically often been used as


a symbol of American cultural


imperialism, as well. Partially in


response to this, in 1971, Coke debuted


what is quite possibly their most famous


TV ad of all time, which is what this


guy represents, the I'd like to buy the


world a Coke commercial.


I'd like to teach the world to sing.


Sing with me.


I like to buy


the world


a Coke


and keep it company.


The New York Times referred to it as a


masterpiece of naive multiculturalism.


This guy is Frankenstein, specifically


Frankenstein as portrayed by the British


actor Boris Karloff in the 1931 movie


Frankenstein by Universal Pictures. You


can tell because he is holding a daisy,


which is a reference to one of the most


iconic scenes in the film. Frankenstein


was originally an 1818 novel by the


British writer Mary Shelley, but


Hollywood adapted it into a


significantly different story. In both


cases, it is about a mad scientist named


Dr. Frankenstein who builds a man and


brings him to life. Though in the


Hollywood movie, this is made much more


gory and disturbing than the original


novel with Dr. Frankenstein making the


man out of stitched-together body parts


that he dug up from a cemetery. The


Hollywood Frankenstein is thus a


distinct enough character that Universal


Studios still claims him to be their


unique copyrighted character as opposed


to something in the public domain.


Although, given how ubiquitous


Frankenstein is as a generic creature of


American folklore these days, I would


say they have pretty much lost that


argument. If you want to learn more


about this, I suggest checking out my


award-winning video on the history of


American monsters. This Frankenstein has


very bright green skin. It's not


entirely known why we think of


Frankenstein as being green, but my


theory is that it probably has something


to do with the often unnatural colors


that were used on movie posters of the


time. These uniquely vibrant colors,


however, are what are sometimes known as


day-glow colors, which are produced from


a kind of dye that was developed by two


brothers from California in the 1940s.


Day-glow technology was heavily used by


the US military during World War II,


then adapted for civilian use in the


decades that followed like so many other


things. This guy is a Blockbuster Video


VHS rental cassette box man. So, the


technology to play movie tapes at home


using a video cassette recorder or VCR


was invented in Japan in the mid-1970s


with VHS or video home system actually


being a specific Japanese brand of video


tape that was so popular its name became


synonymous with the product itself, sort


of like Kleenex. In 1985, a computer


programmer from Dallas named David Cook


founded Blockbuster as a video rental


chain largely as a way of monetizing a


computer-based inventory system he had


developed. It was a system that would


use computers to let workers easily keep


track of which movies were being checked


out by who and which movies were the


most popular and all of that. And it was


a very successful company for about 30


years, but ultimately went bankrupt in


2010 in part because it failed to adapt


to the age of the internet in which


people were increasingly watching movies


at home via online streaming services.


Nevertheless, as the king of the VHS and


later DVD rental market for so many


years, Blockbuster is now a source of


considerable nostalgia for people of my


generation for whom trips to the rental


store have become this very


sentimentalized childhood memory. You


can see the little guy is holding a bowl


of popcorn. Popped or parched corn was


introduced to the early European


settlers of this continent by the Native


Americans making it a truly indigenous


American snack in both senses of the


word. Once movie theaters were invented


in the early 20th century, popcorn


became a very popular thing to sell at


concession stands mostly because it was


so cheap. And to this day, about 30% of


all popcorn in America is eaten in movie


theaters. Though much like a Blockbuster


itself, the movie theater popcorn


industry is also in a pretty steady


decline as the streaming revolution


marches on. This thing is a beholder,


which is one of the most iconic monsters


associated with the Dungeons and Dragons


franchise. D&D is a so-called


role-playing game, which basically


entails one guy known as the Dungeon


Master telling a interactive fantasy


story that the other players have to


attempt to navigate. Thanks to the


game's huge popularity, D&D is usually


credited for playing role in helping


standardize the creatures and lore that


comprise the American fantasy canon. The


game was created by two guys from the


Midwest who published their first D&D


rules manual in 1974, and it contained


descriptions and sketches of the many


different monsters that the Dungeon


Masters could use. In 1975, they


released a supplementary booklet with


more monsters, including the beholder.


As you can see, the beholder is a kind


of scary octopus-looking thing with


eyeballs on every tentacle. Because of


its memorable look and status as a


character that the creators had invented


from scratch, rather than just pulling


from public domain folklore, it became a


sort of mascot of the franchise, often


appearing in the form of book covers and


t-shirts and stuffed animals and all the


rest. This guy also came with a little


20-sided dice. Rolling a 20-sided dice,


or D20, is a big part of D&D gameplay,


and the dice have become a common symbol


of the game as well, though they were


not invented for it. Gary Gygax, one of


the creators, said that he originally


ordered them from a school supplies


company. This is a bald eagle holding an


American flag. It is actually supposed


to be a specific character named Eagly


from the DC Comics franchise Peacemaker.


Why is your pet's name so unoriginal?


Why are you my least favorite kid in


this class? But I like it just as a


representation of two very stereotypical


American cliches. The bald eagle owes


its status as an American symbol to the


fact that it was chosen to appear on the


Great Seal of the United States that was


designed in 1782. Seals being the


national symbol that the founding


fathers cared about the most, even more


than flags as I discussed in another


award-winning video. Going with the bald


eagle was actually a somewhat


controversial decision at the time.


While they are undoubtedly a mighty and


majestic bird exclusive to North


America, they are also scavengers and


this was seen as unbecoming of a


national symbol. Ben Franklin famously


wanted the turkey instead. It is


interesting that one out of 10 American


bald eagles is found in Alaska, a place


that didn't even join the United States


until 1867. Bald eagles were considered


very endangered for about 40 years in


the late 20th century, mostly due to an


explosion in use of the pesticide DDT


during that same time. But the


conservation efforts ultimately worked


and in 2007, bald eagles were officially


declared not endangered anymore with


their numbers having ballooned from less


than 1,000 in the early 1960s to over


340,000


today. It remains a federal crime to


kill one though. Okay, and lastly, here


is my little beaver pal. He is an


original character that is part of


Funko's Nations of the World series.


They call this guy Douglas Beaver and he


represents Canada. You can see he is


holding a little bottle of maple syrup


as well. Does something so


ostentatiously Canadian count as a


symbol of American culture? Well, I


suppose it depends as to whether you


consider the nation of Canada to be a


component part of a larger continental


American cultural civilization as I do.


In any case, the beaver, although not


exclusive to this continent, has played


a very important role in the history of


it just because there were so many of


them here. Early French and British


settlers, working closely with the


Indians, established a powerful economic


system known as the fur trade, which saw


enormous quantities of beavers hunted


and killed so that their furs could be


sold to Europe, where they were used


chiefly to make top hats. During the


peak of the fur trade in the 1720s, it


was estimated that a beaver was being


killed on this continent every 3 to 4


minutes. It is partially out of the


beaver's status as a symbol of the


wealth of the New World that there are


said to be more places in the US and


Canada named after beavers than any


other animal. You can see that Douglas


is wearing the iconic outfit of a


Mountie, an officer of Canada's national


police force, the Royal Canadian Mounted


Police. The RCMP were founded in 1873 to


help bring law and order to this vast


half of the continent that Canada had


recently annexed. Stories about this era


of Canadian history were briefly


fashionable in Hollywood, and the


Mounties have been coasting on that fame


ever since. So, there you go, 10 random


tales of Americana as told through Funko


Pops. So, now it's your turn. Let me


know in the comments if you know any


interesting facts about anything to do


with these 10 things because I'm sure


you do. Now, I hope you enjoyed this


video, but would you like to see it go


on even longer? Well, that's possible if


you check out today's video sponsor,


Nebula.


Hello, friends. Yes, it is true. I'm now


a member of the Nebula gang. Nebula, for


those of you who don't know, is this


very cool online streaming platform


where many of your favorite YouTubers,


like me and Knowing Better and Half as


Interesting and TLDR News and a ton of


others, post ad-free versions of our


videos as well as exclusive videos and a


bunch of other bonus content. For


example, in this week's video, I


analyzed an additional two Funkos, but


you can only see what they were if you


head over to the JJ Nebula page and


watch the extended cut of this video.


Nebula is also home to a ton of


exclusive high-quality full-length


documentaries that you can't find


anywhere else, such as Real Engineering


series on the Battle of Britain or


RealLifeLore's two-part special on the


rise and fall of ISIS. Best of all,


Nebula is amazingly inexpensive for what


it is. If you follow the link in the


thing below, you can get unlimited


access for only $30 for a full year.


Hard to argue with that, eh? It's a big


honor for me to be part of the Nebula


team and I'm hoping to make the most of


it. So, don't delay, head on over and


give Nebula a try today. Exciting stuff.


I am excited. Anyway, thank you so much


for watching and I will see you next


week.


Hello friends.


I have


your


hand through


all of these