Hello friends, my name is JJ and I have
to say as an English speaker, I
sometimes get a little jealous of other
languages. Specifically, I feel like
they have way more cool, weird, and
obscure linguistic traditions than
English does. For example, at the
moment, I'm quite obsessed with how
Korean sometimes uses Chinese
characters, but only in like extremely
limited context that most Korean people
barely have the patience to explain
because this aspect of their language is
so rare and particular. A few months
ago, I made a video attempting to
document some of the more obscure
aspects of the English language. Some
rules and traditions that are known to
native speakers, but are rarely taught
in even the most advanced ESL classes,
just because the complexity of
explaining them greatly exceeds their
day-to-day usefulness. One example I
gave was the concept of the royal we or
this idea of a stereotypical king using
the collective pronouns we and are
instead of I and me. This is of
basically no relevance for day-to-day
communicative English, but it is a
cultural reference to a tradition from
medieval English that you might see
referenced in English pop culture now
and then. Anyway, in the comments to
that video, you guys gave me a lot of
great examples of other obscure or
marginal aspects of the English language
that the real pros know but are unlikely
to be found in any textbook. So, let us
now run through a few more examples of
super duper advanced English
concepts. This one was probably the most
popular thing that you guys brought up.
So, as we know, one of the
distinguishing grammatical
characteristics of English relative to
other languages is that English does not
use gendered articles or pronouns for
inanimate objects. the pencil or the
notebook or whatever are not considered
masculine or feminine. The exception to
this, however, is the very small number
of objects and concepts that English
speakers have historically referred to
using feminine pronouns. This most
famously includes boats, certain other
large vehicles, some forms of heavy
artillery, countries, the concept of a
church, especially the Catholic Church
when speaking of it as a spiritual
institution, and sometimes certain
abstract concepts like destiny, justice,
or nature. It's in no sense
grammatically incorrect to use the its
pronouns to refer to these things. Using
feminine pronouns to refer to them has
just been a cultural custom
historically. But in these more woke
times of ours, it is also a custom that
has become increasingly unfashionable
because of the rather patronizing
implication that certain things that
have been traditionally associated with
being deeply loved or protected by men
must have inherently feminine qualities.
This is the sort of controversy that can
only arise in the context of a
nongendered language culture because of
course every time you do use gendered
pronouns, you are then making an
explicit assumption about why that thing
deserves to have a gender when most
things do not. I remember I had a high
school history teacher who insisted on
always using feminine pronouns when
talking about countries. You know, like
Russia expanded her empire. But when I
carried this over to college, I got
called out by a female professor who
told me not to do it because it was
old-fashioned and sexist. And to be
fair, I think when people gender things
in English these days, it does often
come off as a bit of a cringy
affectation, like you're really trying
hard to LAR as someone who's very
traditional and old school. I remember
there's a scene in the Simpsons where
Mr. Burns refers to the concept of
nature with feminine pronouns. And that
always stood out to me as like a fun
little nod from the writers to how oldy
he is. Nature started the fight for
survival and now she wants to quit
because she's losing. Well, I say hard
cheese. But nature is not our enemy.
Well, surely you agree we can do without
her. No, I don't agree. Another example
I often think about is an interview that
Margaret Thatcher did with David Frost.
She is asked about the sinking of an
Argentine ship during the Faulland
Islands War. And it's interesting
because during the course of the
conversation, she flip-flops between
describing the ship with genderneutral
pronouns and feminine ones. So even a
hyper traditionalist like Thatcher can't
keep it straight. when he announced it
had been torpedoed, he said and for very
good security reasons that it had been
seen earlier that day and it was
torpedoed that day and that she changed
direction and after I cannot remember
the time she changed direction. I know
the time we gave permission for her to
be torpedoed. And I think this is a good
illustration of how independent of
anything else, casually using gendered
pronouns to refer to inanimate things in
English can be quite difficult just
because it feels so unnatural. It and
its come unconsciously while saying she
and her requires deliberate effort. And
for what? Tradition. English is a very
unscentimental language. So appeals to
this kind of thing don't tend to get you
too far. And talking of sentimentality,
similar to a lack of grammatical gender,
English is also notable relative to
other languages for its lack of
respectful or formal grammar that you
were supposed to switch to when speaking
to someone above you in social status.
At best, we've got sir and madam, and
that's about it. Even though England is
famous for having a rigid class system,
this is not really reflected in the
English language itself, which is a good
illustration of how the structure of a
language does not necessarily correlate
with the character of a culture. But
that said, the English did somewhat
workar around this by dreaming up lots
of honorific titles that you're supposed
to use in the place of somebody's name
when you're speaking to someone who
holds some office of importance. The
most famous of these is calling royal
people your majesty or your highness. Or
in a context that more normal people
might encounter, calling a judge your
honor. I remember there was a joke about
this in an old episode of Rugrats where
Angelica kept calling a judge your
majesty. Your highness, I'd like to
dismiss my lawyer for gross
incontinents. You don't have to. I'd
rather quit than represent a little brat
like you. Your majesty, if it pleases
the corpse, I'd like to act as my own
lawyer. That's just the kind of cute
mistake that a kid would make. But it
also illustrates how Your Majesty and
Your Honor are like the only two
honorifics that most English speakers
will ever know. But there do exist many
other more obscure honorifics as well
intended mostly for members of the
aristocracy or the clergy, including
your grace, your eminence, your worship,
and your excellency. And of course, the
pope is your holiness. On some level,
learning all of the precise uses of all
of these titles makes about as much
sense as learning the names of all of
the collective nouns for groups of
animals that I mentioned in the last
video. I mean, I'm probably more
literate in political type things than
most people, and even I can barely tell
you what makes someone your grace versus
your eminence. I do know that your
excellency is often used for very
highranking civilian political leaders
in the English system. A colonial
governor in the British Empire or a
governor general in the Commonwealth is
called your excellency, for instance. An
even more subtle rule of English
honorifics is that when you're referring
to people by these titles on a repeated
basis, it is considered proper to stop
saying your every time. So eventually
you get to the point where you're just
like yes majesty or yes excellency. On a
similar note, we should probably talk
about the arbitrary way that the English
language tends to believe it is proper
to use the prefix Mr. or madam when
referring to somebody by a government
title. So like Mr. Secretary for a
cabinet secretary in the United States
is common, but senators are usually just
called senator. I have heard people try
to come up with rationalizations for
this. Like the idea that the names of
some jobs are more like titles than
others. So adding Mr. or Madam feels
redundant. But I don't think there's
really any grammatical logic governing
this. Beyond that, it is just sometimes
tradition to say Mr. or Madam and
sometimes it's not. I have noticed that
some people seem to believe that
deliberately not saying Mr. or madam
before a title reflects some level of
intimacy with that person. For example,
a former speaker of the US House of
Representatives, John Boehner, recently
shared this anecdote of his meeting with
the late Pope Francis where he has
Francis saying, "Speaker, will you pray
for me?" Which sounds very familiar
because people almost always call the
speaker Mr. Speaker. I saw a video clip
the other day that shows that Attorney
General Pam Bondi talks this way to
President Trump, which really struck me
as a kind of overly familiar way to
address the president of the United
States. Ma'am, would you ask to answer
that question? Sure. President, first
and foremost, he was illegally in our
country. The Supreme Court ruled
president that if as El Salvador wants
to another fun example of this sort of
thing would be when men call a woman
mady which is now widely stereotyped as
like this super cringe incel sort of
thing to say. Mady perhaps I could
suggest joining my Rust server instead.
But it is based on the traditional
English honorific of calling a
high-ranking woman my lady. Just as you
would call a high-ranking man my lord.
Calling a highranking man master like
master William would be an example of
this sort of thing as well. Unless
you're a member of Britain's fast fading
aristocracy. I feel like you basically
only ever see this lord lady master form
of address used in pop culture these
days. Though I do know that in some
high-ranking British courts, lawyers
still say my lord and my lady when
addressing judges. And when you say
these two word phrases often enough,
they tend to kind of slur into one. And
this is where we get the idea of mady
and me or even me as like unique
honorifics. You're in the dock lad. I'm
a judge, me lad. So am I, me? previously
only ever really used in this one very
particular contemporary context, but the
neck beards are helping with that. All
right, now let us talk about Latin. This
is probably the closest English
equivalent to the Koreans still
sometimes using Chinese. Britain was
conquered by the Roman Empire in the 1st
century AD and then freed from a Roman
rule in the year 1410. And yet, Latin
remained the preferred language of
British official dum until well into the
1700s. As a result, Latin still holds a
somewhat revered elite status in the
English-speaking world to this day. I
don't know if this is that common
anymore, but as a child, I actually took
Latin lessons at my fancy private
elementary school. This was framed as an
important way to learn about the ancient
origins of many common English words,
which of course often have roots in
Latin. But beyond that, full-fledged
Latin words and phrases still have some
presence in modern-day English society,
mostly in extremely formal or
pretentious contexts. In particular,
Latin words and phrases remain widely
used in American and British law. And
there are a bunch of common legal Latin
phrases of this sort that any person who
is fully fluent in English is expected
to know the meaning of including habius
corpus men's ria prima fesa and pro
bono. Some of these legal phrases have
migrated into normal everyday English as
well. For example, there is a popular
song called bonafide hustler with
bonafide being a Latin phrase meaning
genuine that is now widely used in all
sorts of contexts. Sometimes it can
actually be pretty hard to say when a
Latin word has been formally assimilated
into English as opposed to being an
identifiably exotic foreign word. Vice
versa, status quo, per se, and even the
humble, etc. are all technically
untransated Latin phrases that English
speakers nevertheless consider perfectly
normal to sprinkle into everyday
conversation. Maybe the distinguishing
characteristic as to whether or not they
have fully crossed the line over into
becoming English words is whether we
still are using the Latin pronunciation
to say them. So you could say that
bonafide is an English phrase, but
carpium would not be. Latin also remains
very present in English-speaking culture
in the form of official mods of things.
usually things that are either very old
or want to project a certain sense of
historic grandeur. Most governments in
Britain and America have issued some
sort of official Latin motto for the
lands that they rule. Here in British
Columbia, for instance, we have splendor
sin okasu, which means something like
brilliance never setting, hence the
flag. Universities are quite fond of
Latin mottos as well. Harvard has a
famously short one, veraritoss or truth.
It's rarer to see this sort of thing in
the corporate sector, but there are
some. A few weeks ago, for instance, I
talked about the famous MGM logo with
Leo the lion. Surrounding Leo is a ring
that reads ars gratia artistis or art
for the sake of art. I feel like most
educated English speakers have a
rudimentary knowledge of a handful of
Latin nouns and verbs and can maybe
understand the meaning of some simple
sentences through some rough
understanding of root words and context
cues. For example, I just made up a
Latin motto for this channel. Seer pax
maxima nullis mortis. I feel like most
superfluent English speakers could
probably get the gist of that one just
because those are Latin words that you
tend to see used a lot in various
contexts in English culture. Some people
in the comments will inevitably correct
my Latin grammar which just shows what
an elite and educated audience I have.
Okay, so speaking of comments, in my
last video on this topic, my friend Jay
Blossom had a clever and obscure example
of a highlevel English concept, the
vocative O. This is the practice of
writing the exclamation O with a single
O instead of O H like is normally done.
Doing this gives the O a sort of
old-fashioned energy. And Jay notes that
this is because the vocative O is often
seen in the King James version of the
Bible, which as I noted in the previous
video is one of the main sources for
what people today think that
old-fashioned English was like. The
movie Oh Brother, Where Art Thou? uses
the vocative O in its title to capture
this sort of King Jamesy vibe. You often
see the vocative O used in songs that
are written in a sort of deliberately
old-fashioned sort of vaguely biblical
sounding way. So like the Christmas
carol, oh come all ye faithful or the
national anthem of my beloved country,
oh Canada. The opening line of the
American national anthem, oh say can you
see by the dawn's early light, was
originally written using the vocative O.
But I noticed that these days a lot of
people will just write it oh H because
that's more familiar. I feel like most
editors would say that in the vast vast
majority of situations you should always
write the exclamation o as oh unless
you're going for like a very very
specific stylistic effect in like a poem
or something. My friend Wooden Potato,
meanwhile, called attention to the
distinctive cadence of what we could
call newspaper headline English. So,
there was once a British politician
named Michael Foot and he was appointed
director of an organization involved
with limiting the spread of weapons of
mass destruction. And there was a famous
joke that the headline in the newspapers
the next day read, "Foot, heads, arms,
body." And that's funny as a play on the
double meaning of all of the words. But
the joke also requires knowledge of the
ways in which headline writing in
English usually involves cutting out a
bunch of verbs and articles and
conjunctions and even mixing tenses in
order to save physical space. So,
Michael Le's weapons group would not be
considered correct English in normal
contexts, particularly in the context of
describing the past tense event of
Michael being appointed to lead. You
would instead ideally say something like
Michael has been appointed to lead the
weapons group. But that's pretty wordy.
And our historic sympathy for the space
restraints of newspaper editors has
conditioned us to accept that headlines
will communicate in just a slightly more
caveman style of English. A funny
satirical example I always liked was
from this old onion article where they
have a headline that reads area
homosexual saves four from fire. Man is
hero gay. That practice of adding a
second adjective with a comma is a very
common newspaper headline trick that you
would never use in any other form of
English. Like you wouldn't say escape is
armed, dangerous in spoken English. But
in a headline, we understand that
sometimes you have to cut out the ands,
which then gives newspaper headline
English this distinctive rhythm, almost
a sort of dialect that jokesters like
The Onion can have a lot of fun with.
[Music]
All right. And lastly, we got a really
weird one and a good example of a very
esoteric part of English that would be
pretty pointless to teach in any formal
context. Sometimes, mostly in the media,
someone will pronounce the letter R in
this very theatrical way by rolling
their tongue. In pop culture, I feel
like this is mostly done as a way of
signaling that a character is very
snobby and pretentious. It tends to come
up a lot in musical theater because it's
a very fun way for a sort of hammy actor
to overd deliver a line. Joseph, I'll
see you rot in jail. The Baron and
Baroness Dean wish to pay their respects
to the groom. Robotnik in the old Sonic
the Hedgehog cartoons speaks this way as
well, which is again sort of a way to
play up his pomposity. I fear your
beamish bow will not even make one bite
for my robo ray.
Only very rarely have I ever seen the
rolling R in other contexts. The other
day I heard a song called Could Have
Been Me by the band The Struts where the
singer does it.
And of course, some Canadians will be
familiar with the Tim Horton's roll up
the rim to win contest where their ads
made a big show of using the rolling R
just to be silly. Yes, it's time to roll
up the rim to win. So, what is this
exactly? Well, if you would believe it,
it's actually another inheritance from
Latin. Back in Roman times, Latin had a
lot of words pronounced with rolling Rs.
This lives on more prominently in other
languages with Latin influences,
particularly Spanish, where rolling Rs
are extremely common and not considered
particularly interesting. But knowing
Latin's pretentious reputation in
English culture, this is presumably why
we have come to associate rolling Rs
with being snobby. It represents an
affected desire to inunciate in a very
proper way. And I guess the more proper
you get, the more your English starts to
regress back in the direction of
something resembling classical Latin. So
anyway, once again, I would be curious
to know if any of you guys have any
other examples of weird or obscure
English things, particularly if you
yourself are an ESL person. And if you
do speak another language, I would be
curious to know if there is any aspects
of your language that you would identify
as being extremely obscure or archaic or
somewhat pointless for foreigners to
learn. I've been thinking about making a
video exploring the sort of broader
topic of cultural anacronisms. So maybe
you guys can give me some ideas. Anyway,
thank you so much for watching. Do not
forget to like and subscribe and I will
see you next week.
[Music]
Hello girlfriend.
[Music]