Hello friends. My name is JJ. And I make


a lot of videos about American culture.


In fact, at this point, I've probably


made well over a hundred videos about


American culture, about American foods


and drinks and technology and


entertainment and religion and education


and fashion and holidays and all that


sort of good stuff. And now, as we enter


America's 251st


year of existence, I thought it might be


a good opportunity to share some of the


conclusions about what I've learned. So,


to do the trendy thing, I have picked


out seven themes that I have come to


consider some of the most reoccurring


characteristics, [music]


influences, and qualities of American


culture. Themes that always seem to come


up when you study American cultural


history. And in that sense, represent


some of the fundamental building blocks


of what is probably the most powerful


and influential culture in all of human


history.


So, just to set us up, I generally favor


a descriptivist understanding of


culture, which is to say, an


understanding of culture that focuses on


identifying the things that define the


lives of most people, or at the very


least, are broadly familiar to most


people. I tend to focus more on the


material realm of culture, which is to


say, the culture of things and the way


that we use them, as opposed to theories


of culture that are more interested in


attributing specific psychological


traits to particular groups of people,


which I consider to be a bit of a


pseudo-science. My seven themes of


American culture that we'll be talking


about today are hardly an exhaustive and


comprehensive explanation of everything


about modern America, but they hopefully


offer some useful insights nevertheless.


So, let's get to big American cultural


theme number one.


Near the end of the Second World War,


which would result in the dissolution of


the once mighty British Empire, British


Prime Minister Harold Macmillan gave a


famously wistful [music] speech where he


said that Britain's ultimate destiny was


to be the Greece to America's Rome.


Ancient Greece was a very advanced and


impressive civilization and ancient


Rome, which came later, intentionally


based many of its institutions, customs,


and beliefs on things that the Greeks


had done first. It's easy to imagine


that British cultural influence on


America was something that wore down


after the American Revolution, but when


you research American cultural history,


you'll see that British influences on


the US remained substantial long, long


after the political bonds tying the two


peoples together were dissolved. And


this was partially because, revolution


or not, a lot of Brits and Americans


continued to think of themselves as


being part of a single Anglo


civilization defined by more


similarities [music] than differences


when it came to the big civilizational


bedrocks of language, religion, law, and


even government. And from that baseline


of civilizational similarity, over the


last 250 years, all sorts of British


things have continued to influence and


shape American culture, sometimes even


more than they have shaped the culture


of Britain itself. The apocalyptic


flavor of evangelical Protestantism that


has proven so influential in modern


American politics, for instance, traces


its roots to a British theologian named


John Nelson Darby, who was very


influential in mid-19th century American


Christianity. The Salvation Army is a


British import, as are the Boy Scouts


and YMCA, as are all sorts of important


American social movements like women's


suffrage, vegetarianism, [music]


and Christmas. Even subtle things like


calling the Republican Party the GOP, or


the I Want You Uncle Sam poster, or


playing Here Comes the Bride at weddings


originate from imported English customs.


[music]


In any given era, a small, but


significant faction of the American


elite is always British-born, including


inventors, industrialists, union bosses,


and Mormon prophets. Indeed, this is


probably only become more the case since


World War II, which saw the emergence of


a sort of transatlantic


entertainer class consisting of people


like Alfred Hitchcock, Cary Grant, and


David Bowie, who spent so much time


living and working in America, it became


hard to know what nationality to use to


describe them. These days, it would be


people like Anna Wintour, Tom Holland,


John Oliver, and noted Fox News host


come California gubernatorial candidate


Steve Hilton who would fit into this


category.


>> And I have to say, listening to my


Democrat friends here talking about


education, it's as if they haven't been


in charge for the last 16 years.


>> I often wonder if thousands of years


from now, when the UK and the US are as


bygone as ancient Greece and Rome, if


people will think of Britain and America


as having been basically a single


cultural entity with the differences


between the North American side and the


European side difficult [music] for


people of the future to distinguish.


It's possible, in other words, that in


the long term, the American Revolution


might be seen as a little overrated. All


right, and now before we get to cultural


layer number two, let us just hear a


quick word from today's video sponsor,


Incogni. Hello, friends. It's your boy


JJ hanging out here at fabulous English


Bay, the most [music] beloved and iconic


beach in all of Vancouver. But, you know


what's even more relaxing than a trip to


the beach? That's right, a nice swim.


And you know what's even more relaxing


than a nice swim? An ice cream cone.


But, a strong third is protecting your


online data. Look, we all know we're


sharing our personal information with


reckless abandon on the internet these


days. In the name of convenience, we'll


tell anyone our full name and email and


phone number and home address if it


means bypassing a paywall or getting a


free download. But temporary convenience


can often mean long-term pain in the


form of endless obnoxious spamming from


solicitors and peddlers. But [music]


Incogni can save the day. Incogni is an


online service that tells all of the big


data collection companies to delete


whatever they have on you, so it's


harder for your personal information to


fall into the wrong hands. And what's


particularly neat-o is that Incogni even


allows you to specifically ask specific


[music] websites to delete whatever they


have on you for maximum peace of mind.


So if you're serious about asserting


greater control over your personal


information online, why not head over to


incogni.com/jjmcc


or use the promo code jjmcc


for 60% off and annual [music]


subscription plus a 30-day money-back


guarantee. So don't delay, make your


online life as relaxing as a trip to the


sunny beaches of Canada and give Incogni


a try today.


>> [music]


>> In recent years, there's been an uptick


in right-wing politicians like J.D.


Vance who enjoy framing immigration as


something that's been, at best, deeply


incidental to American culture and at


worst, a force actively destroying it.


>> The real threat to American democracy is


that American voters keep on voting for


less immigration and our politicians


keep on rewarding us with


>> When the vice president says, as he


often does, that America is not an idea,


but a land and a people, and he brags


about how he's 78th generation or


whatever, he's obviously trying to


impress everybody with a claim of


American cultural purity. But when you


study American history, it's not at all


obvious that multi-generational purebred


Americans make more meaningful


contributions to American culture than


Americans who were born somewhere else,


including far outside of the


Anglo-American civilizational realm. To


acknowledge the enormous cultural


contribution of immigrants to America is


not to suggest that they're winning some


contest of who does more. It's simply an


acknowledgement that they've done a lot,


and the things that they've done have


been among the most important things


that any type of American has ever done.


American food culture is basically


entirely immigrant made, for instance.


It's cliche to even point out, but


whether it's hot dogs, tacos, pizza,


pasta, chow mein, sushi, pho, pad thai,


or butter chicken, the modern American


foodscape remains the clearest


manifestation of the melting pot just


because it entails immigrants literally


importing foreign things to the American


mainland alongside themselves. But just


as consequential has been the vast


number of immigrants who've introduced


something new and significant to


American culture that lacks any overt


links to their place of birth. These are


the immigrants that made America diverse


in a different way by adding something


new that had never previously existed


anywhere. The mighty American toy


company Hasbro was founded by two


brothers from Poland, while Pfizer


Pharmaceuticals was founded by two


brothers from Germany. The Chevrolet


brand was created by Louis Chevrolet


from Switzerland. The Pulitzer Prize was


the brainchild of Joseph Pulitzer from


Hungary. And the Jacuzzi was the


creation of Candido Jacuzzi from Italy.


Ayn Rand of Russia created objectivist


libertarians, while Rene Arand of


Luxembourg created McNuggets. The more


unsung immigrant builders of American


culture, however, are the immigrant


parents who bring their kids to America


as children. It's just a fact that a lot


of the most influential immigrants in


American history didn't make the


decision to immigrate themselves and in


that sense are probably more properly


recognized as products of a sort of


second-hand ambition. Notable Americans


who came from these sorts of immigrant


families include everyone from Irving


Berlin to the Warner Brothers [music]


to Isaac Asimov to Frank Oz to Jerry


Springer to DJ Kool Herc, the founding


father of hip hop. But even attempting


to make any sort of comprehensive list


is so daunting it feels pointless.


Foreign-born Americans are some of the


most consistently reoccurring characters


in the story of American culture across


every possible era and realm. I mean, as


critics never tire of pointing out, even


many of the most influential figures in


and around the anti-immigrant Trump


administration from Elon Musk to Peter


Thiel to the first lady are themselves


[music] foreign-born.


>> [music]


>> As you can tell by all of the names that


I prattled off in that last bit, a lot


of American culture tends to be bound up


with the singular achievements of


singular people. We know that no one


achieves greatness entirely on their


own, but stories of American cultural


accomplishment nevertheless tend to be


presented as inseparable from the


biography of a particular person.


Learning the history of some important


American cultural thing so often entails


learning an accompanying American name


in fact that it's considered noteworthy


when this isn't the case. I remember


working on a video where I was talking


about the history of hamburgers and all


of the books made such a big deal about


how remarkable it was that there is no


universally acknowledged inventor of the


great American burger. This reliable


framing of great men as the driving


force of American culture reflects


something about the degree that American


culture is defined by a constant embrace


of the new. New foods, new clothing, new


machines, new sports, new religions. New


things require people with new ideas,


and we tend to reward these heroes of


newness by making them part of the


American cultural canon in their own


right. Christian Scientists, Mary Baker


Eddy. Red Cross, Clara Barton. Sword and


Sorcery, Robert E. Howard. Nike, Phil


Knight. In many cases, it's not even


particularly challenging to remember who


did what, just given how much of the


modern American cultural vocabulary


consists of nouns bearing the names of


guys who came up with the thing. We


drive Fords and fly in Boeings. We eat


Lays and wear [music] Levi's. We store


Boysenberries in Mason jars and ride


Ferris wheels and shoot Colts. We use


Dr. Scholl's insoles and follow


>> [music]


>> Robert's Rules of Order. It's what you


get in a dynamic culture defined by


things that weren't created all that


long ago by people who only died


relatively recently. We still know who


to give credit.


>> [music]


>> We tend to use corporate as a pejorative


describing the things in American


culture that we find the most bland or


repulsive. People denounce corporate


food and corporate [music] medicine and


corporate media portraying anything


produced by a large corporation as


conformist and mediocre. But at the same


time, the United States is a giant


country, the third biggest on Earth, and


it's hard to imagine a continental


American culture existing without the


aid of continental-sized corporations


able to mass-produce, market, and


distribute the things that define the


American way of life from coast to


coast. The American corporate canon is


rich and diverse. There are American


corporations that grew out of selling


one particular product, like Pepsi and


Campbell's, but now offer a bounty of


alternatives. There are corporations


whose names function as a synonym for


one very particular industry, like


Random [music] House, Hallmark, John


Deere, and Crayola. And then there are


corporations known for nothing in


particular, like Procter & Gamble or the


Altria Group, beyond being giant firms


that control all sorts of lesser brands.


Many of these mega corps stand as


monuments to generations of mergers and


acquisitions led by ambitious


businessmen of earlier eras who sought


to unify smaller local companies under a


single national structure capable of


servicing a national market. Take


Nabisco. Their name literally means


National Biscuit Company, and they were


founded in 1898 from a merger of a bunch


of smaller regional cookie and cracker


corporations. Today, they're the


national distributor of iconic national


snacks like Oreos [music] and Saltines.


We now just breezily take it for granted


that cultural products and services


should be national, that people in


Missouri should be able to buy the same


peanuts, pills, and batteries that


people in Mississippi can. We think it's


normal for Americans to slim down


through national weight loss clubs, hold


memberships in national gyms, and watch


their local sports teams compete in


national tournaments run [music] by


national leagues. Even America's


polarized and ideological politics is a


byproduct [music] of the fact that we


get our news from national broadcasters


documenting two rival political parties


that [music] themselves function as


competing national brands. Whatever we


may think of their wealth and business


practices, at core, so many American


corporations exist to perpetuate a


variety of cultural products across this


continent at a speed and scale that has


proven to be highly effective at


sustaining a coast-to-coast


culture. The challenge of building


cultural unity is one that has puzzled


many nations for millennia, and


America's corporate solution has proven


to be among the most successful and


peaceful.


>> [music]


>> When you think about the rodeo, you


think of the American Southwest. When


you think of lobsters, you think of


Maine. When you think of grunge, you


think of Seattle. That is the standard


way of conceptualizing the intersection


of American regions and American


culture. The identification of certain


cultural products as being imbued with


the particular characteristics of some


particular geographic area, whether


that's the South or the Northeast or the


Midwest or wherever. I personally tend


to think about Canadian culture in this


way, a regional subculture within a


larger American culture that is in turn


mostly defined by the particularities of


the individual Canadian regions. But in


making my videos, I've also come to


realize that it's possible to think of


the role of region in American culture


in a different way. And that's by


appreciating the relative contributions


that different parts of America have


made to American national culture as a


whole because the unflattering reality


is that not all regions have been equal


when it comes to the building of


American culture. Some areas have been


vastly more culturally consequential


than others in terms of producing the


greatest net amount of culture-making


people and innovations and institutions.


New York and Chicago, for instance, as


the two [music] largest American cities


have historically dominated American


cultural production, these are the


cities that most Americans have


immigrated to, most of the big American


corporations have been headquartered out


of, and many of the most influential


Americans have lived and worked in. Los


Angeles, as the center [music] of


American movie and television


production, has played a similar role


since the rise of modern mass media,


while the greater San Francisco area is,


of course, the Silicon Valley building


America's digital life. But, it's been


interesting to learn that some of the


less stereotypically glamorous parts of


America have been pretty culturally


prolific, too. In making my videos, I've


been repeatedly struck by just how many


important cultural things come out of


either Ohio or Pennsylvania, which it's


easy to forget are major American


population centers, as well. But, even


then, population doesn't always


perfectly correlate with cultural


output. However, controversial take, but


I would argue that, despite their size


and fame, Texas and Florida actually


culturally underperform relative to


[music] places like Ohio and PA, just in


terms of how much they've contributed to


American national culture in a way that


goes beyond providing just the


occasional quirky regionalism. To bring


it back to Canada for a moment, I think


that appreciating American cultural


production as something fundamentally


region-based is something very critical


for Canadians to understand. Because


Canada is a different country, it is


easy and natural to assume that Canada


should have culture-producing regions


that are equal in power to the great


culture-producing regions of the US.


But, if we instead conceptualize


Canadian culture as part of a shared


American culture that [music] is mostly


made by a few American regional centers,


then the idea of major culture-producing


centers in Canada starts to feel like an


implausible and redundant ambition. For


example, it would be absurd to expect


Alabama to have its own Hollywood.


Alabama's Hollywood is just regular


Hollywood because LA has emerged as the


main culture producing region of this


continent when it comes to things like


movies and TV shows. Whether this is


unfair to Alabama and something that


should be corrected by government policy


is something for the Alabamians to


decide. The Canadians have certainly


decided that it is, though I would


caution that Canada's track record of


trying to use government to punch above


our cultural weight hasn't been terribly


successful.


>> [music]


>> The adjective Victorian is a good


example of a Britishism that's been


widely embraced in the US. Technically,


it refers to things that happened during


the long reign of Queen Victoria, but


informally, it mostly just refers


[music] to things in the last decades of


the 19th century. Showa is a less


familiar word, but it conveys a similar


idea. It's a term the Japanese use to


refer to things that happened during the


long reign of the Emperor Hirohito, but


these days mostly refers to [music] the


period from 1945 to the dawn of the


1990s. Other non-American countries use


different [music] terms for these


decades, but I like Showa because I am a


weeb. Anyway, the Victorian Showa thesis


of American culture argues that it is


safe to operate on the assumption that


basically all American culturally


significant things were produced in


either this era or that era. The early


United States, I hate to say, was a bit


of a cultural dead zone. It was


obviously a very important time


politically, but so much of what defined


the American experience in those days,


like sustenance farming, land


colonization, illiteracy, and slavery


were things that ultimately faded as


familiar themes of American life. The


destiny of America was not to be a


nation of yeoman pioneers ruled by an


intellectual elite of slave-holding


aristocrats, but a thoroughly urbanized


egalitarian society of middle-class


service providers with lives defined by


a staggering abundance of labor-saving


machines and affordable recreational


pleasures. The true story of American


culture is thus the rise of the


technology, economic models, and social


conditions that made all of that


possible. The rise of things like


long-distance transportation and


communication, consumption-driven


capitalism,


>> [music]


>> continental corporations, universal


education, and tolerance of diversity


both in thought and people. And that


flows largely out of things that


happened in the late 19th century with


the end of the Civil War, the late-stage


[music]


Industrial Revolution, and the decline


of agricultural work, and things that


happened in and after World War II,


which saw a tremendous amount of wartime


technological innovation coupled with an


explosion in the purchasing power of


middle-class families and unprecedented


acceptance of free thought and


self-expression. Celebrations like


America 250 with their clip art of


Lincoln [music]


and Washington and the Liberty Bell and


all that encourage a very political


understanding of American history, the


old cliché of teaching the story of


America as a string of presidential


administrations punctuated by wars. And


because the Victorian Schwa eras are


defined by boring presidents and an


absence of existential war, their


importance tends to be minimized and


under-celebrated. But if the point of


American history is to explain how


America became the sort of place that


most modern-day Americans recognize and


experience, then it's these peaceful


periods of prosperity and progress that


should loom just as large in our


collective imagination as more


blood-soaked eras of statesmen and


generals.


>> [music]


>> As I mentioned at the beginning, I am a


cultural descriptivist, which means I


think that culture is anything we can


observe and identify. When it comes to


theories of the cultures of nations,


however, I feel like a lot of cultural


critics tend to be prescriptivists,


which is to say they offer theories of


culture that have stricter prescriptions


of what counts as culture and what


doesn't. The two big rules of the


cultural prescriptivists when it comes


to national cultures in turn tend to be


that one, elements of a national culture


must be distinct from those of all other


nations, and two, that these elements


should be [music] part of so-called high


culture traditions, including things


like fine art, concert hall music,


religious architecture, ceremonial


costume, and so forth. It is from this


frame that we get the familiar cliché


that Americans have no culture, both


because American life is dominated by


things that are very common everywhere,


or because Americans have made fewer


memorable contributions to these sorts


of realms of high cultural achievement


relative to a place like, say, Austria


or Turkey [music] or Korea. But this is


a very dated and restrictive way of


understanding culture, and one that


seems explicitly designed to exclude


more historically recent civilizations,


like those in the New World, and those


that have been more oriented around


middle-class life, as opposed to kings


and priests and aristocrats. America was


once an unusually bourgeois democratic


society, impressing 19th century


Europeans like Alexis de Tocqueville who


famously wrote two books documenting


just how distinct and unusual America


was. But thanks in large part to the


worldwide adoption of American


technology made during the Victorian and


Showa times, the international spread of


American corporations, other countries'


embrace of American-style liberal


democracy, and the rise of a global


middle class with many of the same


tastes and demands as Americans, what


once made America seem special now just


makes America seem kind of generic and


[music]


baseline. Globalization has, of course,


also made America more like the rest of


the world with everything from


quinceañeras to K-pop now identifiably


part of the American cultural tradition.


And the internet certainly makes us more


aware than ever of just how much the


lifestyle of a random family from


Tuscany or Tokyo now resembles one from


Connecticut or Cleveland. But the global


ubiquity of what was once called the


American way of life doesn't diminish or


undermine the fact that it remains the


American way of life, too. I think it's


important for Americans to still have


appreciation and gratitude and awareness


of the things that define American life


as it's actually lived and not get


distracted by insecurities or pessimism


just because a lot of those things are


now very globally ordinary and not as


flashy as the Hanging Gardens of Babylon


or whatever. American life is full of


cool and wonderful things, things that


often have an interesting American


history and are regarded with


considerable affection and


sentimentality by American people. To


me, that is more than enough basis on


which to claim a culture and a


particularly impressive and resilient


one at that. Which leads me to the


exciting conclusion of this video, which


is the announcement of the first ever JJ


McCullough YouTube channel art contest.


You know, in honor of the big America


250 and the fact that I have such an


obviously creative and talented


audience, I thought it might be fun to


run an art contest based on the theme of


American culture. The assignment is to


create a poster that depicts in some


sort of descriptivist way what American


culture is. I want to leave it fairly


broad because I want you guys to be


creative and original in how you


interpret the scope of this topic. The


deadline is 2 months from now on


whatever specific date I have posted


here on the screen and entries should be


submitted to this email address. I'm not


seeking to profit from or assert any


ownership over the winning entry. This


is literally just a contest to judge


some art and analyze it in a future


video. Okay, so third prize is a $75


gift card to Dairy Queen and second


prize is a 1-year Costco executive


membership and first prize is 1,000


American dollars. I think this will be a


very cool and fun thing. I'm excited to


receive your entries and do a video


analyzing what you guys come up with and


picking a winner that I think best


captures the spirit of the theme. So,


get cracking. Thanks for watching and I


will see you next week.


>> Black [music] jeans or smoke.