It's going to be very difficult


condensing American literature into one


hour, but that's the goal of this video.


And I think it's going to be very


helpful for those of you who are going


to be studying uh the American authors


so that you you have a general sense of


where they're fitting in within the


history. Now, it's interesting because


American literature is fairly new as an


academic discipline. It's also fairly


new as a literature in itself because um


it really comes into its own voice in


the 1800s. So that makes it really about


I don't know 200 years old. But it


wasn't really an academic study or a


discipline uh for several years. When


English departments started to be


created and introduced to the US in the


18 the late 1800s uh it was all English


literature. American literature wasn't


really treated seriously by university


professors. Um it was considered


inferior to to classical literature


which was really the standard in


colleges in the 19th century. And I


think the first graduate level seminar


began at the University of Virginia in


the 1890s. But for the most part, most


universities did not introduce American


literature as as a course or as a


subject of study until after World War


I. I mean, you can imagine why. There


was this new patriotic interest. uh the


nation was very interested in its own


cultural heritage and the universities


were um responding to that interest and


I think rightly so because there's


there's a lot of good American


literature that deserves academic study


and scholarship. So that's one of the


reasons why for the next two months on


verse community, we're going to be


studying American literature. In May,


I'm teaching a course titled Emerson and


the American Renaissance essay. We'll be


reading from the great essayists and


speech writers, including Margaret


Fuller, Henry David Thorough, Frederick


Douglas, and of course, Emerson. And


then in June, we're going to follow that


with Duboce's


uh The Souls of Black Folk. and we're


going to be reading that book of essays


really as uh as a followup to the


American Renaissance because it's an


introduction to the Harlem Renaissance.


So, we're going to be looking at these


two Renaissance movements in America uh


that really represent a flowering of a


particular American literary experience.


So, in this video I wanted to give you


all a bird's eye view of American


literature from its beginning to its


end. Just a brief map of the territory.


So students and self-learners and social


didact friends of this channel know


exactly where they are when they pick up


an American author. So they have an idea


of where exactly in this story these


authors fit. So this video will be a


journey across time. Uh we're going to


be listening to some of the voices speak


to each other. American literature, just


like any nation's literature, is a


history of dialogues, of problems, of


resolutions, of different voices testing


new theories. So this is a story that


begins with the religious anxieties of


the Puritans and the revolutionary and


commercial interests that developed in


the 1700s up to the conclusion of the


American Revolutionary War. Then it


develops into the period of democratic


optimism with Emerson and Wittmann uh


and this emergence of a unique literary


identity in the age of the American


Renaissance.


We're going to see it cool into a period


of post civil war literature in the late


19th century. And then we're going to


see American literature experience


another exhilarating revival, a burst of


creativity with the modernist movement


and the Harlem Renaissance which


furthers many of the innovations that


were made um in the early 1830s. From


then it moves on to the beatnicks


uh in the formal innovations that they


introduce leads up to about 50 years of


uh postmodernist poetry and pros and a


new way of African-American literature


movements that are still happening


today. So there are there are nine major


movements we'll cover in this video and


they're all asking what does it mean to


be American and what does American


literature look like? uh the Puritans,


the revolutionaries, the


transcendentalists, the Harlem


Renaissance writers all answered that


question differently and it's been an


ongoing conversation. So in this in this


lecture I'm going to introduce you uh


two aspects of that conversation. So our


story begins with the Puritan, colonial


and revolutionary period. And I've


grouped those three distinct groups uh


within a time frame of the 1630s to the


1800s. uh to 1800 year 1800. So it's a


broad group and I'll talk individually


about those those three now. So you'll


see here's the little word cloud here of


the main names. So I grouped Puritan


colonial revolutionary period of


American literature stretching between


1630 to around 1800 because they are


best understood I think as a series of


responses to uh historical pressures,


religious pressures particularly. The


earliest English settlers in New England


were not really interested in creating a


new kind of American literature. that


was not their priority and it wouldn't


be a priority until the 1830s. What the


Puritans and settlers were interested in


was creating an identity that was


religiously was one based on religious


freedom. Um their identity is very much


attached still to England and so is


their literary identity. They were


trying to survive uh they were trying to


build a Christian utopia and writing in


this context became a tool for


selfexamination


spiritual self introspection and um


discipline. So sermons, if you look at


the sermons at at this time, uh the


poetry, some of the journals, they all


served the same purpose largely and that


was to understand the human experience


within the broader context of the


Christian story and to make sense of the


hardship that they were feeling and um


to reconcile that hardship with a


hopefully perceived presence of God in


daily life. So within this very


intensely religious environment, you


have Puritans like Michael Wigglesworth


who uh really who wrote really intense


poetry, Anne Bradstreet uh who is a


Puritan woman who wrote and published


beautiful poetry and Edward Taylor who


wrote poetry but did not publish it


during his lifetime. And these three


main poets you should start with them.


They show how literary expression um


really emerges under the pressures of


these constraints of Calvinism and


Puritanism.


Brad Street's poetry


is well she she does so much in her


poetry. She she celebrates, she laments,


she tries to understand, she meditates.


Her poetry really reflects the pressure


of reconciling private emotion with


public piety. And she it's a delicate


way of doing this because um women were


not considered


um authorities on religious matters


within the Puritan hierarchy. Uh so


these were conceived of as purely


devotional exercises and poetic


exercises. She writes about loss. She


writes about love and missing her


husband while he's away in Ipsswitch. um


she writes about the family and she's


continually measuring those feelings


against her faith. Um in the poem on the


burning of her house, for example, she's


really trying to understand why the


house burned down and how she could use


this to her spiritual advancement. Um


why did providence allow the house to


burn down? Um why do some of her


children get sick? I mean, these are


questions that many Christians had to


had to wrestle with. And in that way,


it's no different. The Puritans are no


different in that respect. But the way


she does it, the way she reconciles it


with this Calvinistic uh God who not


only allowed but ordained it to happen


is part of that theological tension


that's going on in much of her poetry. I


mean, Bradre published her poems in


London, and they were successful. Edward


Taylor, by contrast, he's more inward.


He's more like the metaphysical poets.


If you've read George Herbert, John


Dunn, a little bit of Andrew Marll, a


little bit of Trareh


sort of like Henry Vaughn in that way,


it's very it's obsessively spiritual.


You have this Puritan scrutiny going on.


But at the time, but but there are times


when the when the when the poems just


kind of overflow with an emotional


eusiveness that's that's just so in a


way surprising and luminous. His poems


are very rich. Um again the metaphysical


imagery is is is very prominent and


these were written as private acts of


devotion um not for publication. I want


to mention Wigglesworth who uh his poem


was titled the day of doom was a


terrifying bestseller. It's a


description of the last days of judgment


full of hellfire and brimstone and fear


and trembling and um people loved it.


It's you might consider it like a like a


Puritan Gothic or horror if you will. Um


he was an instant classic and it it


really did try to wake people up to the


spiritual reality of of judgment days


coming and and one day you know people


souls will be sorted from the the


righteous and the damned and very vivid


very vivid portrait uh his poetry is so


uh that was also very popular and very


very important to the Puritan devotional


act and uh social structures as well as


you can see so something happened as the


colonies expanded from the 1630s up to


the 1690s


into the early 18th century. You begin


to see that these new pressures are


being placed upon New England society


and they're shaping literary production


in in new ways. I mean Boston and New


England broad more broadly these coastal


towns um changed from the Christian


utopian project to a new commercial


project. Puritans in Boston, they didn't


like how how how


commercial things were getting. Um


Boston became a major trading town. You


had the long warf which was reaching out


into the ocean like a hungry arm. If you


see pictures of the long wararf in


Boston the way it used to be or


depictions of it on the map, see how


huge it was. Um and ships would just


come in and dock and and unload


merchandise and bring merchandise back


to London. And many of the Puritans


started moving west to to preserve their


religious inheritance because the the


the coast was getting too secular uh for


them and it was becoming increasingly


mercenary and capitalistic. You also get


this new idea. So as the Puritans and


the more conservative Christians are


pushing west, you get the introduction


of the enlightenment ideas that are


coming over from England and Europe into


Boston, which really emphasized reason,


science, happiness, and human potential


for happiness. And this ethos gradually


replaced the purely theological concerns


that had occupied Boston for many


decades. And at the same time, the


realities of slavery and transatlantic


exchange


complicated this unified vision of the


colonial identity of the Calvinist


identity as well because it was broadly


theological. Phyllis Wheatley her work


is is coming out of this tension. She


was an enslaved African woman who wrote


in a refined neocclassical style, the


kind that was very popular in England in


the early 1800s.


And it's it's a wonderful uh


demonstration of of how well read she


was and how she was able to adapt her


own sort of confessional voice to this


proper mode neocclassical mode of


writing and her poetry


responds to the world that questioned


her humanity


even as it celebrated enlightenment


ideals of liberty and rationality in


some ways and this is what's challenging


about Phyllis Wheatley especially in her


poem about being taken from Africa is


that she is is grateful


uh to be in the states and there is that


in a way uncomfortable gratitude we


might think um that's that's also


balanced with what the poems are


actually doing which which is asserting


her shared humanity with everyone else


and the fact that that she's been able


to cultivate and to practice this


neocclassical style uh is is part of of


the the social importance of her work


and I have a study of of Wheatley's


poetry on this channel I believe um I


taught American early American


literature about a year ago or two years


ago so that should still be on there if


you're interested um so you've got these


subtle challenges of the underlying


structures and assumptions that really


do reveal the contradictions at heart of


the colonial society and the very um


market society that's coming to Boston.


By the mid to late 18th century,


political pressure came to the forefront


as the tensions between uh the American


colonies and and Britain escalated.


Literature became a vehicle for


rhetoric. And this is where Philip Freno


comes in.


Philip Freno very prolific poet. I


remember when I was manager of the child


library at at Harvard, I would I would


go and look at some of the collections


that they had of his and he has this


this three volume collection of his work


in these old um clothbound editions. You


open it up, you see it's double columned


each each page. I so prolific.


I looked into some of his poetry. I


taught some of his poetry two years ago.


It's a good example of how poetry was


was very rhetorical. They was interested


in persuasion at this time. again very


18th century and Feno used this to


imagine a new national identity. Feno is


speaking to that shift of like the


American epic identity coming forth and


he's furthering it. His poems, his


essays, his speeches direct directly


respond to the American conflict of the


American Revolution as it's amping up,


as it's happening, and as it as it


concludes. He uses satire. He uses


patriotic imagery to really rally and


support and to articulate a distinctly


American voice. Writing was no longer


primarily about spiritual introspection


when you get to this period. Benjamin


Franklin was also really important uh as


a pros writer at this time. His voice is


a favorable response and a voice really


coming out of the enlightenment movement


all about industry and the ideal of the


self-made individual. You can read


Franklin's autobiography which is just


beautiful, beautiful pros. I mean he's


he's schooled on on Joseph Addison and


many of the great English essaists of


the 18th century. So it's just just


wonderful pros. Poor Richard's Almanac


is also another good one. Gives a vision


of human progress based on hard work uh


ingenuity and uh yeah burning the


midnight oil uh is is really what what


his works celebrate. So it's different


in many of the ways that the Puritans


were expressing their devotion and using


writing because it's much more


humanistic when you get to Franklin and


Freno fits very comfortably with the


Puritan ethos in some ways because


within the Puritan ethos you have this


this idea you have to work hard to


produce evidence that you are saved. You


don't work to be saved but you work to


prove to be saved. And again, you you


see this industry kind of going forward


in some of uh Ben Franklin's and in


others writings at this time where the


theological economy of salvation for the


Puritans is transposed into this actual


very real market economy of industry.


And so in that ways they really do


overlap. I will say before I move on,


John Wman John Wman I I read his um his


journals. He's a Quaker, um, an


abolitionist before it was cool. Um,


beautiful spiritual insights. He was an


itinerant minister.


Read Wulman's journals. Just absolute


beautiful American pros, that is to say,


um, chasteed, plain, and and confident.


Uh, that's the American style. So once


you get to the 1800,


not long after the revolutionary war, we


have Frederick Douglas, Wittman, Herman


Melville, American literature has a


problem. So this is before we get to


these folks. So the turn of the century,


1800s. It's basically American


literature is basically no different


from English literature in its style. It


needs to differentiate itself and become


unique. I mean the states they gained


political independence. They became the


states United States. Um but they had to


gain artistic independence in the


American Renaissance which spanned


roughly from the 1830s to 1865 was that


movement was that quest to find the true


American voice. Now, in this section


here, I've I've broadened this section


to include basically any writing between


1800 to 1865 to really accommodate some


of the forerunners like James Fenomore


Cooper. I would be I would be wrong to


admit him. He's he's a big he's a big


novelist at this time. With the US no


longer a set of fragile colonies, um the


states faced these new pressures of


rapid territorial advancement and


expansion. uh you have the new rise of


democracy. You had a lot of de


industrial cha change and more urgently


a moral and political crisis of slavery.


And in response writers during this


period of the long American Renaissance,


we could call it began to ask


what did it mean to think, write and


live as Americans rather than as


cultural descendants of Europe? What


does it mean to actually have our own


literature? Now, some of James Finemore


Cooper's work uh some of his works


really lay the groundwork for the


American Renaissance. So, his 1826


novel, The Last of the Moheakans


is one of these stories. So, there's


this scene, a conversation between


Hawkeye and David. Let me just read you


book repeated Hawkeye with singular and


illconcerned disdain. Do you take me for


a whimpering boy at the apron string of


one of your old gals? In this good rifle


on my knee, for the feather of a goose's


wing, my ox's horn for a bottle of ink,


and my leather pouch for a crossbarred


handkerche to carry my dinner book.


What have such as I who am a warrior of


the wilderness, though a man without a


cross to do with books? If you're if


you're familiar with the


transcendentalist, you you know where


this is going here. It goes on, I never


read, but in one, and the words that are


written there are too simple and too


plain to need much schooling, though I


may boast that of 40 long and


hardworking years. What call you? The


volume, said David, misconceiving the


others meaning it is open before your


eyes, returned the scout. I have heard


it said that there are men who read in


books to convince themselves there is a


God. I know not. But man may so deform


his works in the settlement as to leave


that which is so clear in the wilderness


a matter of doubt among the traitor


traitors and priests. Now this concept


of the wilderness as the book of God


like you don't need to read any other


books than this wilderness very romantic


very wordsworthy very immersonian and if


you read Henry David Thorro's essay on


walking which uh combined two lectures


one on walking and the other called the


wild you'll see how this this concept


that Cooper establishes here in his


novel is at the forefront of the


transcendentalist movement in the 1830s


and 40s and 50s. So keep that in mind


and then come to the 1836


essay on nature. So that when the main


figure of the American Renaissance,


Ralph Waldo Emerson, published his 1836


essay nature, you find this similar


sentiment. To speak truly, few adult


persons can see nature. Most persons do


not see the sun. At least they have a


very superficial scene. In the woods is


perpetual youth. Within these


plantations of God, a decorum and


sanctity reign, a perennial festival is


dressed, and the guest sees not how he


should tire of them in a thousand years.


In the woods, we return to reason and


faith.


Emerson's concept of the woods very much


very much like Cooper's concept or


Hawkeye's concept of the wilds in the


wilderness. And there are studies about


Cooper's influence on Emerson. But


Emerson's essays call for this


intellectual


call for this intellectual independence


and self-reliance. And he wrote in


response to what he saw as America's


cultural dependence upon Europe. And his


ideas prompted the American


transcendentalist movement.


See my other videos on YouTube about


that. And uh Henry David Thoro. So you


can see here a dish of of many many many


samples of literature here. Henry David


Thoro puts these ideas into practice


most famously in his experiment at


Walden Pond in his book titled Walden


and his writing reflects both a


withdrawal from society and a critique


of it which is so much of what his


walking does so much of what is a week


on the Marramac does and many of his


other great writings. Uh his journals


too are just fantastic in this respect.


He's responding to the pressures of


industrialization. This pressure to


conform to the market. I mean, what was


it? The market explosion, the market


revolution of the 1850s was happening


was at its height when Thoro published


Walden. That's when we needed to hear


it. So, you have this this strain de


developing in American literature at


this time. A a conflict really between


commercial moneyed interests and this


deeper spiritual vision. And from now


on, this is going to drastically shape


the character of American literature.


This tension as we see it all the way up


to the present day. The period here, the


American Renaissance is marked by a


conflict over slavery. And no writer


responds with more rhetorical force


against this than Frederick Douglas. I


mean, Emerson is writing against it.


Thoro is sojourer truth uh Harriet Beer


Stowe many others Margaret Fuller but


Frederick Douglas he was he was a former


enslaved man whose autobiographical


narratives just exposed the brutality of


slavery and asserted his own


intellectual and moral authority on the


subject and as a writer in general he is


he's one of the greatest rhetorics of


American literature we'll be reading one


of his speeches in our course uh the


American Renaissance essay Okay. So his


work challenges some of the more


optimistic individualism of


transcendentalism


by basically arguing that freedom must


be understood as a political that is


social necessity. Uh so the rugged


individual can only go so far here. We


need everyone helping uh and pushing


toward a more social idea of justice and


a better world. And you can see the the


Puritan concept of like let's make let's


make our community here a Christian


utopia an ideal. You see this search for


the ideal even present in the


abolitionist writings and I think


rightly so. Frederick Douglas's


uh small novel the heroic slave for


instance you takes the Protestant


conversion narrative and adapts it to um


a conversion to become an abolitionist.


So you have this moment where this


figure who's not an abolitionist hears


words being spoken and instantly


converts almost like a religious


experience. So that's an interesting


contin continuity you'll see in


Douglas's work and many of the other


abolitionists of this time. The American


Renaissance also produces some of the


most ambitious works of fish of fiction


uh in the nation's history. And I'm


looking at uh Herman Melville here uh


but Nathaniel Hawthorne as well. He


explores the legacy of Puritanism as it


lives on um in his short stories and his


novels. Herman Melville pushes even


further and he uses the the voyage in


Moby Dig to confront these questions of


meaning, the search for revenge uh of


obsession, which is a very American


thing, and the limits of human


knowledge. It's also ecologically


interested in a way that's still very


relevant to the American ethos today.


Meanwhile, in poetry, you have Walt


Whitman, of course, who's breaking


radically from the poetic tradition.


He's celebrating democracy, the body,


the diversity of human life in race and


sex. His verse is expansive free verse.


He is a poet of extension, as Helen


Vinler said. Uh, and Emily Dickinson's


writing around this time, too, although


I included her in the next panel. I'll


explain why later, but she's also she's


the poet of concision and she's writing


during this period, too. So, let's go to


the late what I'm calling the late


Renaissance period from 1865 to 1900.


This overlaps with the larger


Renaissance movement, but it's


different. So this period begins with


the aftermath of the American Civil War.


A moment that forced the United States


to confront


the physical devastation of the war and


the the moral and social fractures that


were were opened like a like a wound at


this time, a festering wound. And the


earlier optimism of American Renaissance


and American transcendentalism is really


giving way to a more sober, a more


critical and questioning literary


sensibility. So writers in this era are


responding to those pressures.


Industrialization is is rapidly moving


at this point. You have the expansion of


cities, this movement to the west,


widening of class divisions, the breach


between the the source the the south and


the north following the war and the


unresolved consequences of emancipation.


As a result, literature begins to turn


toward realism. So in the previous


movement, we had a lot of romanticism


and idealism, transcendentalism. Now


we're returning to something a little


more grounded. you get the social


realism of Henry James uh even of Mark


Twain and Kate Shopan to an extent. This


is a transition period between the


American Renaissance and the post civil


war era to modernism. So you can see


this as the stepping stone into


modernism which we'll see in a moment.


You see I added Dickinson here although


she was writing at the same time as


Whitman. She was a contemporary of


Emerson. Emerson actually came to stay


at um uh her sister-in-law's house right


across on the property of the of the


Dickinson estate. So, and she was


familiar with his writings. So, she


really does belong in both of these


camps. But I put her here because her


poems were first published altogether in


the 1890s. So, in terms of like a force


upon the literary history, she's in this


movement for that reason. Now, one of


the most enduring voices of this period


is Mark Twain. I've got his his his name


very big there. He's humorous with a


bite. Many of his novels contain a sharp


social critique under a layer of the


comical. I'm thinking of Tom Sawyer and


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. And


these books preserve in American


dialect. And this use of of the


vernacular language of American dialect,


one of many American dialects,


is an innovation at this time. It's it's


bringing something new to the tradition


and it helps reflect the reality of


America as a place with distinctly


different sounding voices. So this is an


element of social realism or rather


literary realism. Here William Dean


Howells also promoted realism as a


literary movement. You get this really


mature beautifully in Henry James, a


real American literary genius. James'


novels give attention


to the psychological and cultural


tensions developing between the United


States and Europe. He's interested in


exploring those. The portrait of a lady


is a good example of this where you have


American culture and European culture uh


compared and at odds with each other at


some times. James' work is interested in


a different kind of pressure, a question


of how American identity is shaped


in contradistinction to these older


religion or these older uh cultural


traditions. Europe for example like to


some extent America is trying to develop


an identity that is not


contradistinctive


only but something that can stand on its


own legs and this is the problem with


modernity since I'd say the reformation


where it's like how do you define a


movement like the reformation without


its antecedent Roman Catholicism how do


you define unitarianism without its


antecedent in Calvinism how do you


define secularism M without its


antecedent in Christianity. How do you


how do you define American l American


literature and art without reference to


its antecedent in European and English


literature? So again really wrestling


with the sense of American identity and


literature and you get a sense of that


in his novels. Two other figures


important here, Edith Wharton, her name


really should be bigger. um sometimes


called America's first lady of letters


and Kate Shopan both expand literary


realism by including the issues of power


of sex of sexuality and personal


freedom. Kate Shopan gets taught the


most, but Edith Wharton I think is a


better artist. So, you know, that's


that's one of the reasons why Kate


Shopan is a little bit bigger because um


when it comes between the two, I found


that most high schools, if they're going


to teach a woman writer of this period,


it's it's usually Kate Shopan because


she's got short stories that work really


well uh for teaching in in a classroom


setting. So I think it's more of that


convenience but but Shopan is really


great for exploring the inner lives of


women in American society in a society


particularly in the south that restricts


their autonomy. So the awakening is a


good example of this. It confronts the


um the constraints placed on female


identity and it pushes against some of


the social norms. I mean like like Twain


she's got a bite. So does Wharton. Edith


Wharton examines the ri rigid structures


of the upper class and really drags it


through the dirt. Um she's very critical


of it in her novels and her novels in


this way are just beautiful works of art


but they're also commentary on the


social elite. A house of mirth uh is a


good example of that probably a good one


to start with. So you the theme here is


it's kind of like critique I would say.


Um, Emily Dickinson is in a way


critiquing Calvinistic evangelicalism


just as Henry James is placing American


identity under scrutiny. Mark Twain as


well, Kate Shopan, Edith Wharton. So,


you see this is a very critical period


that gives way to the modernist period


which I'm grouping roughly between 1900


to 1940s. The modernist movement in


American literature really begins in the


early 20th century as a response to the


confidence of inherited traditions,


namely the Victorian literature, but


also some of the decadent literature of


the previous period. Um, and inherited


traditions, it's it's pushing out. So,


it's moving beyond critique of those


which you saw in the last period as kind


of a stepping stone to this. It's going


to do something new. So after the


devastation of World War I, um you you


had these very dis disorienting effects


of industrialization, mechanized


warfare,


the fragmentation of society and


religious structures, the breakdown of


authority and tradition. All of this


contributes to the sense of the older


ways of understanding being


insufficient. We need something new.


writers no longer trust the linear


narratives. Um the stable identities of


the past are are really, you know, we've


lost faith in those at this point. In


some ways, we're working with ruins. The


modernists experiment with form and


language. TS Elliott's The Wasteland is


a good example of that. They capture a


reality that feels fractured and often


incoherent and they want to make it


intelligible through meaning uh through


process of meaning making. I mean


sometimes uninformed critiques of


modernism and postmodernist literature


will often say that oh they just they


destroyed meaning and they wanted to get


rid of the logos and but actually no it


was like really the wars that did that


in poetry was the logos trying to bring


things back together. I mean read Hilda


Doolittle's poetry after World War I and


you'll see that she's not participating


in an iconoclasm. She like a lot of his


poetry is trying to bring meaning back


into relevance. So I think that's


important to mention. Somehow on YouTube


like modernism and postmodernism have


become these bad words. And maybe it's


Jordan Peterson's fault. I don't know.


Um the internet culture is still very


foreign to me. I don't really understand


my way around these these issues um like


I probably should. But I just wanted to


say like really understand modernism on


its own terms. TS Elliott, you can begin


with him. He understands this the


cultural disintegration. He's got these


dense elusive uh lines in his poetry.


The wasteland is a good example of that


with which assembles fragments,


different voices, illusions, uh


different languages into this collage


that really mirrors the brokenness of


modern life, but actually prompts um


connections between those fragments.


Ezra Pound, huge figure at this period,


calling for a radical renewal of poetic


language. He has this command uh to make


it new. That's really the motto of the


age. He's interested in reviving a kind


of global classicism. Emerson was


interested in reviving American


classicism. You can see Pound


participating in that too. Um William


Carlos Williams, fantastic poet, uh


responding to Elliot and Pound in his


own way. He will insist that poetry in


the local and the immediate is the way


to write. uh he he's not interested in


the in the elusive so much. He's not


interested in connecting his works to a


broader network of literary tradition.


Now he's he's famously arguing that


there are no ideas but in things. So


he's returning back to things. His work


responds to the same pressures as Elliot


and Pound, but he seeks to clarify and


and and make his poetry concrete in form


and content. His his his poetry is often


funny, sometimes a little difficult, but


not as difficult as as Pound or Elliott.


So, coming off of Elliot and Pound, um


William Carlos Williams is a breath of


fresh air. You have Robert Frost, which


by the way, the best of Frost never gets


anthologized. The best of Frost never


gets taught. I am so determined very


soon to offer a course on Robert Frost


where we're going to be reading,


we might read through all of it. I mean,


we read all of Yates back in August. you


read all of Yates's lyric poetry on my


platform. Why couldn't we do that with


Frost? I'm I'm determined to do it


eventually, if not this year, next year


because Frost is fantastic and most of


the the best of his work uh you don't


find in anthologies. You have to buy a


whole collection of his poetry to read


it. Wallace Stevens


just fantastic. I have nothing to say


there other than than Sunday morning,


his old idea of the imagination. Um he


shares with Carlos with William Carlos


Williams this interest in going away


from ideas and back to things or rather


the imagination.


Beautiful essays uh on the imagination


actually he has. So uh he's he's


interesting as well. Marian Moore Lowel


Bishop these are figures that bridge the


modernist movement with the


postmodernist movement. We'll talk about


them, but they they also uh belong in


this group and in the next as we'll see.


In pros fiction, you find similar


portraits of psychological and social


critique and fragmentation. Ernest


Hemingway


uh develops a spare really masculine


understated kind of pros which is really


really sineuy and and and strong. Um


it's it's good. It's good pros and it's


such a distinct style. He does it really


well. His characters are often


struggling with finding meaning as well,


especially in a world that seems


completely indifferent to human life. Uh


William Faulner though, as the opposite


of of of Hemingway,


he's interested in complex long


sentences. He's interested in in


shifting perspectives through these


nonlinear narratives uh to explore the


history and mean meaning in the American


South uh during the war years and and


kind of after the the war years during


the reconstruction period. Also


interested in the tensions the social


tensions between the south and the north


and his his work really reflects those


lingering problems uh in the south


especially in the past. the legacy of


slavery of of prejudice of um the


injustice of the white ya men um all of


that that happened with the American


Civil War and after and he's interested


in the consequences on the present and I


would say that if you really want to


understand the American South today you


really should go back and read Faulner


and


study the the Civil War. I mean, the


nostalgia that's so heavy in American


country music today where it's like most


most country music today or a lot of it


I should say doesn't even involve


narrative. It's just a catalog of good


things like


like I don't know chicken and cold beer


and like a can of skull in the back of


my jean pockets sort of thing. And


what's interesting is like as a


phenomenon,


uh I think it's very much located to


this this impulse to go back to the way


things were. Um something was stolen


from us. It was the north who did it. Um


we are persecuted and our ways are dying


and fragile. Uh and we must protect it.


And the catalog and country music are


the list of things they celebrate is is


an elogiic impulse. I think it's a


response to the loss of part of part of


what's happening. And that loss has


really lived on in American southern


culture, namely through its art. Let's


move on to the Harlem Renaissance


because this is where we see another


flowering of of of a distinct American


voice. This Renaissance emerges in early


20th century. Um, it could be, you know,


part of it's a response to the


historical pressures that reshaped


African-American life and identity in


the states after the war. Um, so Falner


will tell the story of the white


southerners after the war. The Harlem


Renaissance is really interested in life


and identity of the African-American


after the Civil War. You have the great


mig migration which is bringing hundreds


of of blacks from the south to the north


to live in northern cities like Harlem


uh where these communities are formed


under the conditions of both opportunity


and constraint and scarcity. So at the


same time one of the things that


prompted this was black veterans coming


back home after World War I. The war


really intensified the demands for civil


rights. A lot of the black veterans came


back, returned to a home that was


unwilling to even like let them sit in


the front of the bus or to enter into


certain establishments after they fought


for the country. And so they were really


unwilling to accept these racial


injustices that um that they came back


home to. So at the intellectual center


of this movement is web Duboce whose


ideas about double consciousness


articulate the tension of seeing oneself


through both black and American


identities. He's really the start of it


I'd say which is why we're studying him


in June before we study the Harlem


Renaissance lyric in July. So this is a


prelude to the Harlem Renaissance poetry


we'll study later. But he draws from an


an older American tradition begun I


think by Emerson as many critics and


scholars have noted Harold Bloom uh a


favorite among the watchers of this


channel among them. So compare how


Duboce draws from Emerson to create his


own representation of black identity. So


here's a passage from Emerson. Man is


the dwarf of himself. This is from


Emerson's nature. Once he was permeated


and dissolved by spirit.


He filled nature with his overflowing


currents. Out from him sprang the sun


and moon, from man the sun, from woman


the moon. The laws of his mind, the


periods of his actions externalized


themselves into day and night, into the


year and the seasons. But having made


for himself this huge shell, his waters


retired. He no longer fills the veins in


vains.


He has shrunk to a drop. He sees that


the structure still fits him, but fits


him colossally. Say rather, "Once it


fitted him, now it corresponds to him


from far and on high."


Okay. And then you go to Duboce


in his souls of black folk, his essay on


spiritual strivings. Hold that Emerson


in your mind here. So, as I'm reading


this aloud, I will be reading the word


negro to quote from Duboce. I don't want


to change his language here. Um, that's


a standard practice when you're reading


from these texts. Otherwise, I think it


would be pretty inappropriate for me to


do that. But just so everyone knows, I


am going to read that uh in this passage


here. He writes, "Duboce, after the


Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and


Roman, the Tuton and Mongolian, the


Negro is a sort of seventh son, born


under a veil and gifted with second


sight in this American world, a world


which yields him no true


self-consciousness, but only lets him


see himself through the revelation of


the other world."


It is a particular sensation, this


double consciousness, this sense of


always looking at oneself through the


eyes of others, of measuring one's soul


by the tape of a world that looks on in


amused contempt and pity. One ever feels


his twess,


an American, a negro. Two souls, two


thoughts, two unreconciled strivings,


two waring ideals in one dark body whose


dogged strength alone keeps it from


being torn aunder. Right. What's


striking here is that Duboce adopts that


expansive almost cosmic language of of


Emerson in a way and turns it into a fun


a fundamentally different psychological


and social reality that is of being a


black American at this time. Emerson


imagines an original a unified human


spirit that once filled nature and now


it's really diminished kind of fall from


wholeness and Duboce I think takes that


he's in conversation with it in an


interesting way he takes that concern


with the divided self and reinterprets


it through a lived experience of the


black Americans so Duboce argued that


art is political and I want to go back


to the cloud here that we have so we


have that uh with the other names too.


Art is political for Dub to Boyce. Uh he


insists that literature should serve the


cause of racial justice, social


transformation, and his influence really


did shape this broader movement. Even


pushed some writers into writing. The


thing is about this movement, some of


the authors in this cloud would really


have issues with Duboce. But the thing


about all these movements that we've


studied so far, including the Harlem


Renaissance here, is that it's not


really a unified single philosophy. You


can't think of it as like they were all


agreeing to the same exact doctrine or


philosophy. Um, however, they were all


pushing


the purpose and the direction of black


American literature in new ways.


Langston Hughes responds to this need by


embracing the rhythms of everyday black


life in his poetry. He incorporates some


jazz rhythms, uh, vernacular speech.


Claude McKay, a very confrontational at


times, using uh, traditional forms like


the sonnet and direct political language


to protest some of the injustices that


he sees. Fiction writers at this time


are also considering these these


complexities. Um, Zoranil Hursten of the


South. Um, her our their eyes were


watching God is her novel draws on black


folklore and oral traditions. You have


that amazing and astounding astounds me


every time I read it uh moment of the


the vultures speaking to each other in


that in that novel.


It breaks out of that realistic mode


into kind of the supernatural which is


really interesting. Um all of these are


worth worth studying and we're going to


be studying some of them uh this year on


verse. So do join us if you're


interested in that. The next movement


number six is the beats and you can


think of this as kind of a prelude to


the postmodernist movement or the early


postmodernist movement. The beat


movement in America emerged in the 1950s


as really a response to the spiritual


bankruptcy of America. It's funny, you


know, like I said, so much of American


literature is responding to a lack of


real spiritual character in America.


These guys are confronting consumerism.


Um, this is during the Cold War, during


that anxiety. I mean, after World War


II, the US experienced great economic


growth.


You have the the the the growth of the


suburban stability. Uh, and many writers


felt that this prosperity came at too


high a price. really it was the cost of


spiritual depth what you see all


throughout America as a as a kind of


superficial Christianity uh rising at


this time and the Beats reacted against


what they saw as a c as a culture of


corporate materialistic greed Christian


nationalism to some extent and the


poetry of Alan Ginsburg who's probably


the closest literary descendant of Walt


Whitman captures that urgency in the


rebellion of the beat generation um his


book Howell


wonderful collection of poetry. It's


long, breathless, uh it's raw, it's got


this powerful subject matter and and


language. He's borrowing too from the


Hebrew prophets in the way that Whitman


does, but he does it to such an powerful


effect. I mean, you got to read Jeremiah


and Isaiah,


the the books of the Bible and the King


James to really understand how, which


the title how comes from these prophets.


That's a quotation from the King James.


So this I mean and he's he's Jewish. So


this is another part of his poetic


identity here. And he's challenging um


this character of of of superficial


spirituality in America. And he's he's


bringing to light people whose voices


are ignored by mainstream society, the


America that the televisions want to


show. And he responds to a culture that


he believed was completely bankrupt


spiritually. and he thought that poetry


and protest and language of revelation


could really bring it back. Jack Carowak


is in this


this this ethos as well. Carowak is


challenging he's trying to channel that


desire for freedom into a pro style that


feels spontaneous and unfiltered and his


his works on the road or the dharma


bombs uh he in those works he transforms


travel as a kind of spiritual pilgrimage


and carowak


he wanted to revitalize American


spirituality by introducing the eastern


traditions. So this was partly inspired


by Buddhism


umic texts uh partly also inspired by


reading Thoros Walden. So this is


connected all the way back to the


American Renaissance and those guys were


reading um the the Hindu scriptures as


well. So he and Gary Snyder as we see


here wanted to introduce Buddhism to


really open up a new way of seeing the


world, new spiritual identity. Carowak


said that uh beat the beat generation


beat stands for beatotific as in the


beatotific vision um in a way uh Carowak


uh uh was very interested in in making


this this part of American culture. Gary


Snyder too responds to a different


unrelated pressure. Snider's interested


in that growing alienation that we


are feeling from the natural world. So


now there's this split between the


suburban sprawl and the urban sprawl and


our connection to nature which we really


did have. So he draws on this very


environmental awareness that's emerging.


He's introducing eastern philosophy as a


way to revitalize a theology of nature,


a philosophy of nature which we still


need. And Snider's poetry tries to offer


an alternative to the industrial and


consumeristic,


you know, philosophies that are going on


in America at this time. So, in a way,


he's he's he's taking the


transcendentalist impulse, moving it


forward, and transforming it into uh


really a spiritual discipline. So,


that's that's one of the the great


things that the Beats did, and you can


really see it in their poetry. Uh, next


I just want to say a few words about


postmodernist poetry which I'm dating


from 1960s maybe all the way up to


today. Alan Ginsburg you see makes an


appearance here. American postmodern


poetry emerged mid to late 20th century


and it was a response to the aftermath


of World War II in the same way that the


Beats was in similar ways. Um, these


poets are confronting a reality that's


shaped by mass media now, by television


uh and consumption of of shopping malls


and the technological expansion of


competing ideologies and the digital


screen. We we are still very much


dealing with the problems that they were


trying to solve. The confidence in the


coherent narratives of the American


identity and history are starting to


unravel at this time. the myths are are


are are falling apart under scrutiny.


And many of these poets were trying to


figure out where where they belonged in


this. So in reaction to some of those


things that I just mentioned,


postmodernist poetry often embraces


uncertainty and play really their poetry


really is playful. To really understand


the postmodern poetics, um don't don't


think of don't think of like Dered's


deconstructionism. I I actually think


that has


that influence has been overstated.


They're interested in play. They're in


language play, treating language as


a choice in a way as as something


unstable and yet open to


reinterpretation as something inviting


dialogue and something that's not


monologic. And I think we I should say


there is a difference between what's


called postmodernist philosophy kind of


post Nietian philosophy and


postmodernist poetry. I mean poetry is


really interested in meaning and playing


games with meaning. It's influenced


partly by Vickenstein of course but you


know uh it's it's interested in


preserving the connections that our


minds make in the process of


interpretation. And yes, I added


Ginsburg to this to signal that the


Beats is a movement toward this


postmodernist aesthetic. You can


actually even lump it in altogether.


John Ashberry becomes one of the most


loud voices, one of the most influential


voices, and he he's difficult because


he's consciously resisting the


straightforward interpretation. He's


he's resisting uh the close reading


method uh that's really popular with the


new critics of the 60s and 70s and he's


moving toward more fluid voices between


tones and images and perspectives that


really resist a reductionistic


interpretation. AR Ammons explores the


relationship between this this chaos and


order. You've got that going on as well.


uh the poems are more meditative


uh tracing patterns of thought. So it is


it is in a way poetry becomes very much


like thinking in motion, thought in


motion. And I've I've whenever I've


taught post-modernist poetry, I


sometimes preface it by reading a few


metaphysical poets because I do think


that the instability of language, the


ambiguities that the metaphysical poets


like John Dunn, George Herbert were


playing with becomes a new tactic in


this era and that's really related to


developments in criticism which was


really turning a new critical eye to the


metaphysical poets for the first time.


So these poets were reading them. So,


some of these poets respond to


historical pressures. You know, you've


got the Vietnam War. Denise Leverto has


some wonderful poems in response to


that. Uh Louise Glick is also a voice


that's still very important here. Jory


Graham. Um I will say Leto


beautifully combines lyrical intensity


with political engagement and she also


uses uh draws in the same way that


Ginsburgg does from Hebrew prophets in


interesting ways.


um she's addressing issues of war and


social justice. And so this is does this


is carrying forward some of the Harlem


Renaissance preoccupations and


understandings of art as a as a tool as


a political tool. Jory Graham a lot of


her lyrics will show how looking at the


world involves an act of careful seeing


and meaning making. Charles Olsen is


associated with the Black Mountain


School uh which takes a more radical


approach to form and his concept of


projective verse reflects that


traditional structure of poetry in favor


of a more open field of composition


where poems follow the movements of


thought. So again you have this idea of


thought becoming um playing a a real


role. Poetry is interested in enacting


thought in interesting ways. So that's


postmodernist poetry. Let me say a word


about postmodernist fiction. Don Dillo


is on here. Let's see. Thomas Pinchin,


John Bar. Um, and I've I've labeled this


all the way up to today. So, we have to


1960s up to now. Develops under similar


circumstances that the poets are


responding to. They're interested in


formal experimentations. I mean, the


main guy here is Thomas Pinchin with his


sprawling and densely elusive novels. um


many of which present the world governed


by hidden systems of control. Uh there's


a little bit of Kofka-esque there.


There's a little bit of the 18th century


works like Gravity's Rainbow. Uh there


is this deep suspicion beneath the


surface of history. Uh there's this


suspicion that I think is very important


to the postmodernist fiction at this


time. Don Dillo's style is one in which


reality is constantly mediated by


screens, commercials, and


advertisements.


uh jargon, institutional language, and


digital meaning making. It's it's really


difficult to distinguish in his novels


the uh the authentic experience from the


representation of those experiences in


the digital world. And that's exactly


what we're wrestling with now. And with


pinchion, you have this rise of


metaphiction,


which is basically a mode of writing


that draws attention to its own


artificiality.


I mean the postmodernist novel is very


aware in this way. John Bar is a good


example of of this kind of writer. You


can get a sense that Bar's novels are a


self-contained system of language and


conventions.


There's this reflexivity, this sort of


awareness of a broader cultural


skepticism about grand narratives and


stable meanings. And uh since we are


reading James Joyce's Ulyses in August


and September of this year, I will say


that if you read that novel, I think it


it it is a good precursor, a good


prerequisite for studying the


postmodernist novel. Uh and then the


last the last moment I want to highlight


here is the post-war African-American


literature,


which goes well, you could date it early


1950s all the way up to today. Post-war


Black American fiction um developed as a


response to the nation still structured


by racial inequality even after formal


emancipation and the constitutional


promises of equality and even in some


respects uh after the civil rights


movement just like the the Harlem


Renaissance you can trace this this back


it's very much in conversation you can


trace a minor current here from


Frederick Douglas in the 19th century


black American authors all the through


to the Harlem Renaissance and uh this


post-war African-American literature


tradition, black Americans returned from


fighting in World War I and from World


War II came back to a world that was


segregated in which they were treated


inferiorly. And this tension between the


democratic ideals and the lived reality


becomes one of those central shaping


forces of the literature of this period.


And you see this going all the way back


to Phyllis Wheatley where you have the


Enlightenment ideals all in the culture


about freedom and liberty and the social


reality at odds with those ideals. James


Baldwin brings a personal and analytical


voice to the questions of race. Um his


his pros confronts the moral


contradictions of the African-American


experience in American society. Ralph


Ellison also responds to the pressure of


being seen but not truly acknowledged.


Again, the title of of his novel,


Invisible Man, is one of those works


that that does that. He also


uh was named after Ralph Waldo Emerson.


You you're picking up a connection here


where the American Renaissance movement


was really a cradle of American


literature and even black American


literature which becomes really


important as an extension of that


movement. So, in a way, Ellison uses a


high modernist style in his art, uh, in


a way that some of the others kind of


took issue with. Tony Morrison expands


the scope of African-American


literature. Her work beautifully


recovers the histories that had been


neglected. So, she's bringing attention.


I mean, if you think of Beloved,


absolutely heartbreaking, uh,


astonishing novel, uh, is good example


of this. It responds to that enduring


trauma of slavery and its psychological


afterles that uh literally haunt the


scenes and the landscapes and the people


uh even after that's gone. The ghost is


a symbol of the past that's still past


and still present. Again, probably start


there with her. It's absolutely


wonderful. Alice Walker's The Color


Purple responds to the silences within


American society and the literary


tension. It's like, how do we get a a


realism to represent what these tensions


are like for our readers? That was


really a question for the the pros of


the post-war African-American tradition


even up to now. It's all a part of that


representation within um literature


which is so interesting because


literature I mean a lot of people love


to treat literature as though well let's


separate it from politics and let's


separate it from race and let's separate


it from gender and just look at it as it


is when really like the picture is is


more difficult than that. You can't


separate it from spirituality, from


religion, from race, from uh sexuality


and and and


personal experiences uh and identity as


a citizen in the US. And so what you


what you see in the long arc of any


nation's history, you see a long


conversation developing in literature.


And that conversation was part of what


this essay tried to capture to see how


these folks here in this cloud are


speaking to the clouds all the way that


we started with in this video. And the


more you read these figures, the more


you'll overhear that conversation. that


literature is not a constellation of


isolated events, but it's a long flowing


stream of discourse, of dialogue, of of


of sharing ideas, of confronting and


contesting ideas and bringing forth


something new out of critique into


innovation. And that's what all great


literature does. And so when you think


about tradition, think also about


lineage in that way. Uh, I hope you


enjoyed this. If you like my teaching,


come to verse. I'm I'm bringing the


academic study of literature to those


outside of the academy. And all of my


courses are they're all discussion based


and they all mirror the university


classroom. So, uh, come come check us


out. Thanks for watching and until next